
The 2009 Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup Final was played on September 2, 2009, at Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Stadium in Washington, D.C. The match determined the winner of the 2009 U.S. Open Cup, a tournament open to amateur and professional soccer teams affiliated with the United States Soccer Federation. This was the 96th edition of the oldest competition in United States soccer. The match was won by Seattle Sounders FC, who defeated D.C. United 2–1. Clyde Simms scored D.C. United's only goal. Fredy Montero and Roger Levesque scored Seattle's two goals as the club became the second expansion team in Major League Soccer (MLS) history to win the tournament in their inaugural season.
D.C. United entered the tournament as the competition's defending champions. They had previously won the tournament in 1996 as well. Both Sounders FC and D.C. United had to play through two qualification rounds for MLS teams before entering the official tournament. Prior to the final, there was a public dispute between the owners of the two clubs regarding the selection of D.C. United to host it at their home field, RFK Stadium.
As the tournament champions, Sounders FC earned a berth in the preliminary round of the 2010–11 CONCACAF Champions League. The club also received a $100,000 cash prize, while D.C. United received $50,000 as the runner-up.
The U.S. Open Cup is an annual American soccer competition open to all United States Soccer Federation affiliated teams, from amateur adult club teams to the professional clubs of Major League Soccer (MLS). In 2009, Major League Soccer, which has teams that play in both the United States and Canada, was allowed to enter eight of its U.S.-based teams in the tournament. The top six MLS teams from the previous season qualified automatically, and the remaining two spots are determined by preliminary qualification matches. The eight MLS entries begin play in the third round of the tournament.In 2009, MLS expanded into the Seattle market adding a new team to the league, Seattle Sounders FC. As an expansion team, they had to play through the qualification matches before entering the tournament. Likewise, D.C. United did not finish among the top six 2008 MLS teams, and therefore had to play through qualification rounds before entering the official tournament.
Prior to their first qualification match against Real Salt Lake, Sounders FC coach Sigi Schmid asserted that the U.S. Open Cup was important to the club and that they were playing to win. Sounders FC played U.S. Open Cup home games at the Starfire Sports Complex in Tukwila, Washington. The facility is smaller than the club's home stadium for league matches, Qwest Field, but Sounders FC representatives preferred the atmosphere at Starfire for smaller cup matches.On April 28, 2009, Sounders FC defeated Real Salt Lake 4–1 in their first qualification match. Sebastian Le Toux scored two goals, and Roger Levesque had three assists in front of a sold-out crowd at Starfire. Sounders FC hosted their second qualification match on May 26, 2009, also at Starfire, this time against the Colorado Rapids. Reserve player Kevin Forrest scored the only goal in the match as Seattle defeated the Rapids 1–0, securing their entry into the third round of the official cup competition as one of the eight teams representing MLS.On July 1, 2009, Sounders FC traveled to Portland and defeated the Timbers of the USL First Division, the team's historic rival, 2–1 in front of a sold-out crowd. Roger Levesque and Nate Jaqua both scored for Seattle. The following week, in a quarterfinal match at Starfire, Sounders FC defeated visiting Kansas City 1–0 on a penalty kick in the 89th minute scored by Sebastien Le Toux. Three weeks later, on July 21, Sounders FC won their semifinal match 2–1 over the Houston Dynamo at Starfire. Seattle took the lead for good when Stephen King scored a goal five minutes into extra time, sending Sounders FC to the cup final.
MLS clubs were first included in the U.S. Open Cup tournament in 1996. D.C. United won the tournament that year, and repeated their success in 2008. In 2009, the club began its title defense in the MLS qualification rounds. This meant that they had to win six games instead of the four needed to obtain the cup in 2008.In their first qualifying match on March 28, 2009, they hosted FC Dallas at RFK Stadium in Washington, D.C. They defeated Dallas 2–0, with Fred and Brandon Barklage scoring in the 21st and 66th minutes, respectively. D.C. United's second qualification match was also played at RFK Stadium, on May 20, 2009. In a high-scoring match against the New York Red Bulls, D.C. won 5–3. Chris Pontius scored two of United's five goals, qualifying D.C. for the third round of the official tournament.On June 30, 2009, D.C. United began official cup competition against the Ocean City Barons of the USL Premier Development League. The match, hosted by United at Maryland SoccerPlex in Boyds, Maryland, ended with D.C. on top 2–0. As a fourth-tier club, the Barons lineup had featured amateur players while United's included only three regular starters. The match remained scoreless for 74 minutes before D.C. took the lead on a penalty kick by late substitution Christian Gomez. One week later, on July 7, D.C. United hosted their quarterfinal match at the SoccerPlex again and defeated the Harrisburg City Islanders of the USL Second Division 2–1. On July 21, 2009, D.C. United hosted another lower tier team in their semifinal match at the SoccerPlex. This time they defeated the Rochester Rhinos of the USL First Division 2–1. The match was tied 1–1 until the 82nd minute when Boyzzz Khumalo's goal propelled D.C. into the cup final.
Both Seattle Sounders FC and D.C. United submitted bids to U.S. Soccer to host the final. D.C. United's bid included a proposal to host the match at RFK Stadium, their home stadium in Washington, D.C. with a capacity of 45,596. Sounders FC's bid proposed to host the match at Qwest Field, their home stadium in Seattle, with a capacity of 32,400 for soccer matches. The procedure for selecting the winning bid was kept private. When D.C. United's bid was chosen, Sounders FC general manager Adrian Hanauer expressed skepticism that it had been better than the Seattle bid. He further noted that if Seattle had hosted the match, it likely would have sold out. This prompted a reply from D.C. United president Kevin Payne, who argued that D.C. United had won the bidding process fairly, and said that he was offended by Hanauer's comments. Following this public disagreement, D.C. United launched a marketing campaign to sell more match tickets, which included a new web site, WeWinTrophies.com, which chronicled the club's history of titles as an original MLS franchise. The campaign also included an open letter in local newspapers stating that Sounders FC and its fans did not think D.C. deserved to host the match and declared D.C. fans as "the standard" for support in the league. Videos from local celebrities were posted on the team's official blog urging fans to attend the final. Ticket discounts and special pricing on concessions for the match were also announced as part of the special marketing effort for the cup final.
Prior to meeting in the U.S. Open Cup final, Sounders FC and D.C. United had met only once, on June 17 at Qwest Field in Seattle. In that meeting, Sounders FC squandered a 3–1 second half lead by allowing D.C. United to score two goals late in the match. It ended in a 3–3 tie.Since 1996, when MLS teams were first included in the tournament, the home team had won nine times and lost only twice in the final match. Commenting on what his team brings to the game, Sounders FC coach Sigi Schmid stated, "We bring a clean slate. We haven't had any negative experiences in championship games, so we want to just build up a positive legacy for our team and we know we have a chance to make some history for our team. Every player knows that and that's something we want to try and do." D.C. United had previously won the U.S. Open Cup twice in 1996 and 2008 and this was their fourth appearance ever in the tournament final. D.C. United president Kevin Payne simply stated, "We want to win anything we enter."Sounders FC general manager Adrian Hanauer commented on his club's desire to win the cup and a berth into the CONCACAF Champions League, "That's one step towards our stated goal of competing in the world club championships, because the winner of the CONCACAF Champions League wins a spot in the World Club Championships."
The 2009 U.S. Open Cup Final was played on September 2 at RFK Stadium in Washington D.C. A total of 17,329 fans attended the match, 38% of the stadium's available capacity. Approximately 200 Sounders FC fans sat together in the upper deck. Both the travel distance and the mid-week scheduling made it difficult for Seattle fans to attend. Live television coverage was provided nationally by Fox Soccer Channel.
Both clubs had used a mix of reserve players and starting (first choice) players in previous tournament matches, but for the final neither team used reserve players in their starting lineups. Seattle took the field in a 4-4-2 formation while D.C United was in a 3-4-3 formation. The match kicked off at 7:37 pm local time.Five minutes into the match, D.C. United first-year player Chris Pontius had the first chance of the evening as he pushed past Sounders FC defender Leonardo González to receive a diagonal pass from Clyde Simms. However, due to the difficult shooting angle, Pontius' shot was wide of the far post. In the 10th minute, Sounders FC forward Fredy Montero had a close range shot on goal, but D.C. goalkeeper Josh Wicks parried the shot away. Seven minutes later, Christian Gomez had a goal scoring opportunity with a direct free kick from 28 yards (26 m), but his low kick curled just wide of the target. In the 18th minute, Seattle midfielder Sebastian Le Toux played a ball in to teammate Freddie Ljungberg, whose shot on goal was barely saved by Wicks, who kicked out a foot to block the shot. Just before halftime, Le Toux crossed to an unmarked Montero, whose direct header on goal was just in reach of Wicks, who again made the save to keep the score level, 0–0. Seattle outshot D.C. 9–6 in the first half.
As the players took the field for the second half, D.C. coach Tom Soehn decided to replace Fred, who had been a non-factor in the first half, with Santino Quaranta. In the 60th minute, Gomez, Pontius and Luciano Emilio combined inside Seattle's 18-yard box for a United opportunity, but Pontius mishit the shot, which resulted in an easy save for Seattle's goalkeeper, Kasey Keller. Seven minutes later, another failed D.C. United opportunity resulted in a Sounders FC counterattack, where Freddie Ljungberg's shot was saved by Wicks. The rebound rolled in front of Fredy Montero, who dove feet first and kicked the ball into the goal, giving Sounders FC a 1–0 lead. Following the goal, frustrated D.C. United goalkeeper Josh Wicks stomped on Montero's leg while he was still on the ground. After consulting with the fourth official, referee Alex Prus showed Wicks a red card for his behavior, dismissing him from the match. United's backup goalkeeper, Milos Kocic, was substituted for Christian Gomez after the incident, and D.C. played with 10 men for the remainder of the match.Despite being down a man, D.C. United controlled possession of the ball as the match progressed towards full-time. Just four minutes before full-time, Seattle's Sebastian Le Toux pushed D.C. defender Dejan Jakovic off the ball, dribbled in towards goal, and then provided a centering pass to teammate Roger Levesque who scored, extending the Seattle lead to 2–0. With time ticking away, United desperately threw every man forward and managed to narrow the scoring difference to one in the 89th minute when Simms kicked home a loose ball after a Quaranta free kick. During the five minutes of  stoppage time, D.C. continued with repeated crosses and shots attempting to get an equalizer.In the end, Sounders FC was able to withstand D.C.'s late push for a 2–1 victory, becoming the second MLS expansion team in league history (Chicago Fire was the first) to win the U.S. Open Cup in their inaugural season. Players and coaches ran onto the field after the final whistle, jumped up and down together and hurried to a corner of the field to acknowledge the Sounders FC fans cheering in the upper deck.
In the post-game press conference, Josh Wicks discussed his ejection, saying: "It was a mistake on my part and I've got to learn my lesson. The fourth official made a call and the ref made the final decision. That was it. I've got no excuses for it. Tremendously, very, very disappointing." One month after the stomping incident, U.S. Soccer announced that Wicks would be suspended from the U.S. Open Cup tournament for five matches.After the victory, many Sounders FC fans gathered at King County International Airport to greet the team as they returned to Seattle. The trophy was put on display at several events around Seattle in the weeks following Sounders FC's victory. On September 19, the cup was presented to Sounders FC fans to carry in the March to the Match prior to a Sounders FC league game at Qwest Field against Chivas USA.By winning the U.S. Open Cup tournament, Sounders FC earned a berth in the preliminary round of the 2010–11 CONCACAF Champions League. Seattle also received the winner's $100,000 cash prize, while D.C. United received $50,000 as the tournament runner-up. Kevin Forrest, whose game-winning goal against Colorado allowed Sounders FC to qualify for the tournament, received a share of the prize money and a medal, despite being released by the team before the final.In January 2010, the club's success in the U.S. Open Cup tournament was listed among the many reasons the Washington State Senate passed a resolution honoring Sounders FC.On October 5, 2010, Seattle returned to the final and defeated the Columbus Crew 2–1 to repeat as U.S. Open Cup champion.  This time Sounders FC hosted the final at Qwest Field, drawing an attendance of 31,311 which broke the 81-year-old record for the event.

The 2009 World Series was the championship series of Major League Baseball's (MLB) 2009 season. As the 105th edition of the World Series, it was a best-of-seven playoff contested between the Philadelphia Phillies, champions of the National League (NL) and defending World Series champions, and the New York Yankees, champions of the American League (AL). The Yankees defeated the Phillies, 4 games to 2, winning their 27th World Series championship. The series was played between October 28 and November 4, broadcast on Fox, and watched by an average of roughly 19 million viewers. Due to the start of the season being pushed back by the 2009 World Baseball Classic in March, this was the first World Series regularly scheduled to be played into the month of November. This series was a rematch of the 1950 World Series.
Home field advantage for the Series went to the AL for the eighth straight year as a result of its 4–3 win in the All-Star Game. The Phillies earned their berth into the playoffs by winning the National League East. The Yankees won the American League East to earn their berth, posting the best record in the Major Leagues. The Phillies reached the World Series by defeating the Colorado Rockies in the best-of-five National League Division Series, and the Los Angeles Dodgers in the best-of-seven NL Championship Series (NLCS). The Yankees defeated the Minnesota Twins in the American League Division Series and the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim in the AL Championship Series (ALCS) to advance to their first World Series since 2003. As a result of their loss, the Phillies became the first team since the 2001 Yankees to lose the World Series after winning it the previous year.
Cliff Lee pitched a complete game in the Phillies' Game 1 victory, allowing only one unearned run, while Chase Utley hit two home runs. In Game 2, solo home runs by Mark Teixeira and Hideki Matsui helped the Yankees win by a score of 3–1. After a rain delayed start, Game 3 featured more offense, with a combined six home runs and thirteen total runs en route to a Yankee victory. The Yankees won Game 4 by scoring the decisive three runs in the ninth inning after an alert base running play by Johnny Damon. The Phillies avoided elimination with a win in Game 5, aided by Utley's second two–home run game of the series. The Yankees secured their World Series championship with a Game 6 victory in which Matsui hit his third home run of the series. He was named Most Valuable Player (MVP) of the series, making him the first Japanese-born player and the first full-time designated hitter to win the award; Matsui was the series' MVP despite starting only the three games that were played at Yankee Stadium, since the designated hitter position is not used in NL ballparks.
Several records were tied, extended, or broken during this World Series, including team championships (Yankees with 27), career postseason wins (Andy Pettitte with 18), career World Series saves (Mariano Rivera with 11), home runs in a World Series (Utley with five), strikeouts by a hitter in a World Series (Ryan Howard with 13), and runs batted in in a single World Series game (Matsui with six).
During the off-season, the Phillies promoted assistant general manager Rubén Amaro, Jr. to general manager, succeeding Pat Gillick who retired at the end of a three-year contract. Their most notable offseason player change was in left field, as Pat Burrell departed due to free agency and was replaced by free agent Raúl Ibañez. Another notable acquisition was free agent pitcher Chan Ho Park. Park was originally signed as a backup option for the bullpen, as reliever J. C. Romero was assigned a 50-game suspension after violating the Major League Baseball drug policy, but Park won the fifth starter's job in Spring Training.In July 2009, Phillies scouts evaluated pitcher Pedro Martínez in two simulated games against the Phillies DSL team, leading to a one-year, $1-million contract. Replacing Jamie Moyer as a starter in the Phillies rotation on August 12, 2009, Philadelphia won each of Martínez's first seven starts, the first time in franchise history that this had occurred with any debuting Phillies pitcher. The Phillies made one large acquisition at the trade deadline, trading four minor league players to the Cleveland Indians for pitcher Cliff Lee and outfielder Ben Francisco. Lee won seven of his twelve regular season starts for Philadelphia in 2009.During the regular season, the Phillies led the National League East for most of the year, taking first place for good on May 30. Ibáñez had started the year strongly, batting well over .300 with 17 home runs and 46 runs batted in (RBI) in the first two months of the season, which led the New York Post to call him an "early MVP candidate". He was placed on the disabled list in mid-June for a groin injury, however, and though he returned he did not bat above .260 for any other month that season. Although Ibáñez did not receive MVP votes his teammates Ryan Howard and Chase Utley had successful years, finishing 3rd and 8th in the balloting respectively. The Phillies finished the season with a record of 93–69 (.574), six games above the second-place Florida Marlins in their division.The Phillies defeated the wild card Colorado Rockies in the National League Division Series (NLDS), three games to one, advancing to the National League Championship Series (NLCS). Facing the Los Angeles Dodgers, the Phillies won the NLCS, four games to one, becoming the first team to repeat as National League champions since the 1995–96 Atlanta Braves. Ryan Howard won the NLCS MVP for his strong offensive performance during the series. Howard tied Lou Gehrig's postseason record by having at least one RBI in eight straight games across the NLDS and NLCS. They became the first World Series champion to return to the World Series the following year since the 2000–01 New York Yankees.
The Yankees' offseason began in November 2008 with control over their organization shifting from long-time owner George Steinbrenner to his son Hal Steinbrenner. Notable player departures included Mike Mussina—who announced his retirement on November 20, 2008—as well as Bobby Abreu, Jason Giambi, and Carl Pavano, who all left as free agents. Notable free agent acquisitions included starting pitchers CC Sabathia and A. J. Burnett, and first baseman Mark Teixeira. Another major addition was outfielder Nick Swisher, acquired in a trade with the Chicago White Sox.The Yankees played the 2009 season in Yankee Stadium, their first year in that park after playing for 84 years in "Old" Yankee Stadium. They won the American League East with an eight-game lead over their rivals, the Boston Red Sox, compiling a record of 103–59. Sabathia won 19 games and position players Alex Rodriguez and Teixeira both had strong seasons offensively, Rodriguez with 30 home runs and 100 RBI and Teixeira with 39 and 122 respectively. Closing pitcher Mariano Rivera earned his 500th save against the Yankees' cross-town rival New York Mets, becoming the second pitcher in history to do so. On September 11, 2009, shortstop Derek Jeter recorded his 2,722nd career hit, passing Lou Gehrig to become the all-time leader in career hits recorded as a Yankee.The Yankees defeated the Minnesota Twins in three games in the American League Division Series and the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim in six games in the American League Championship Series (ALCS) to win their first American League pennant since 2003. Sabathia was named MVP of the ALCS with two wins in the series. The Yankees' victory in the ALCS earned them their 40th World Series appearance in franchise history, and their first since losing to the Florida Marlins in 2003.
The two teams played a three-game interleague series at Yankee Stadium in May 2009, with the Phillies winning two of the three games. The series included two blown saves by Phillies' closer Brad Lidge in games 2 and 3, although the Phillies came back to win the final game in extra innings.The Yankees had home field advantage for the Series as the American League had won that year's All-Star Game. The team match-up was heavily discussed and analyzed in the media, per the east coast bias, prior to the beginning of the series. Both teams' offensive lineups were heavily touted, with the Yankees and Phillies leading their respective leagues in runs scored per game. Yankees third baseman Alex Rodriguez drew particular focus in the media for his success in earlier rounds of the 2009 playoffs in contrast to past postseason performances. The two lineups featured twenty former All-Stars and three former MVP award winners. Only one regular starter between both teams, Phillies catcher Carlos Ruiz, did not have at least ten home runs during the 2009 regular season. The two teams combined for 468 home runs during the season, more than any pair of opponents in World Series history.The pitching staffs were also the subject of significant discussion prior to the series. The starting pitchers for Game 1, CC Sabathia and Cliff Lee, were regarded as aces who dominated the 2009 postseason with a 0.96 earned run average (ERA) between them. This matchup was of particular note, as Sabathia and Lee were former teammates from the Cleveland Indians and each had won a Cy Young Award with that franchise. Yankees manager Joe Girardi had been using a three-man starting rotation during the playoffs, in contrast to the four-pitcher rotation used by the Phillies. This difference led USA Today to give the Phillies' starting rotation the "edge" in the series, as the World Series had one fewer day off than previous rounds of the playoffs, making the series less conducive to using a three-man rotation. Gene Wojciechowski of ESPN criticized Girardi's strategy, arguing that Chad Gaudin should have pitched in Game 5 or 6, instead of A. J. Burnett or Andy Pettitte on reduced, three days' rest. Wojciechowski argued that while Sabathia had proven his ability to pitch on shorter rest, Burnett and Pettitte should have been given their regular time between starts. Burnett had drawn some criticism, as he performed poorly in his last appearance before the World Series, a start in Game 5 of the ALCS in which he allowed six runs over six innings. However, Burnett had previously been successful on short rest, going 4–0 with a 2.33 ERA in four career starts on short rest before this game. Some believed Girardi settled on a three-man rotation because he had limited options for a fourth starting pitcher, either Gaudin or Joba Chamberlain, who had been inconsistent as starters in the regular season and had been shifted into the bullpen for the postseason.The matchup of closers, Mariano Rivera and Brad Lidge, also drew attention. Rivera and Lidge were the only closers who had not blown a save during the 2009 postseason, whereas closers on other postseason teams blew 11 saves in the 24 postseason games before the World Series in 2009. Both had performed well during the postseason, but Lidge had posted a 7.21 ERA during the 2009 regular season, in contrast to Rivera's 1.76. Lidge's 2009 numbers were in stark contrast to the previous season (41 out of 41 save opportunities, a 1.95 ERA, and 92 strikeouts in 62 games). As a result, USA Today gave the Yankees the edge, noting that Lidge had blown two saves against the Yankees during their regular season series earlier that year.
The Series started on October 28, 2009, which was the latest start in World Series history, beating the previous record held by the 2001 World Series (October 27). Game 4 was played on Sunday, November 1 and the series-winning Game 6 took place on November 4. The Series was only the third to end in a month other than October. The first came in 1918, which was played entirely in September after the regular season was cut short due to World War I. The other such series was in 2001 when the September 11 attacks caused a delay in the baseball season that eventually forced the end of the World Series into November.Earlier in the season Commissioner Bud Selig expressed interest in scheduling a World Series game during daylight hours instead of the evening. The starting times were ultimately moved before 8 p.m. ET for the first time in 30 years, but no day games were played. The Philadelphia Eagles and New York Giants of the National Football League (NFL) played across the street from Citizens Bank Park at Lincoln Financial Field on the day of Game 4. The NFL moved that game's kickoff time to 1 p.m. to avoid it ending too close to the start of Game 4. Similarly, Game 5 was played at Citizens Bank Park on the same day as the Philadelphia Flyers hosted the Tampa Bay Lightning of the National Hockey League (NHL) at the Wachovia Center. The opening faceoff of the hockey game was scheduled for 7 p.m. but the NHL moved it to 5 p.m. to avoid conflict.The umpires for the series were Joe West, Dana DeMuth, Gerry Davis, Brian Gorman, Jeff Nelson, and Mike Everitt. The World Series crew had included at least 1 umpire who had never worked the World Series in 24 of the past 25 series; however, following several mistakes by umpires in earlier rounds of the playoffs, this crew did not.The Phillies had won the previous season's World Series against the Tampa Bay Rays for the franchise's second championship. The Yankees had lost their previous World Series appearance to the Florida Marlins in 2003 and had not won since 2000 against the New York Mets. This was the fifth Series played between teams from New York and Philadelphia, and was the first Yankees–Phillies matchup since 1950. The series also was the fourth consecutive time that the Phillies would have faced a team from the current AL East in the World Series, while the Yankees had faced a NL East opponent in four of their five most recent World Series appearances.This Series had two unofficial nicknames: "Turnpike Series", for the New Jersey Turnpike, which connects New York to Philadelphia through the state of New Jersey, and "Liberty Series", based on the Liberty Bell in Philadelphia and the Statue of Liberty in New York.
First Lady Michelle Obama and Second Lady Jill Biden escorted former Yankees catcher and World War II veteran Yogi Berra to the mound, where the ceremonial first pitch was thrown by a veteran of the Iraq War. The Phillies' Ryan Howard got the first hit of the 2009 World Series by doubling in the first inning. Howard was stranded in the first and the game was scoreless after two innings. The Phillies scored first with a two-out home run by Chase Utley in the top of the third inning. Through the first five innings, Philadelphia starting pitcher Cliff Lee allowed no runs and three hits, striking out seven Yankees batters. In the top of the sixth, Utley hit another home run to give the Phillies a 2–0 lead. The starting pitchers Lee and CC Sabathia continued to pitch until the top of the eighth when Sabathia was replaced by Phil Hughes. Hughes walked the first two batters and was replaced by Dámaso Marte. Marte got two quick outs and was relieved by David Robertson, who walked Jayson Werth and gave up a two-run single to Raúl Ibañez. The Phillies added two more runs in the ninth with an RBI single by Shane Victorino and an RBI double by Howard. Lee finished with a complete game allowing one unearned run on six hits and striking out ten batters, not walking any of the hitters he faced.Lee's pitching performance made history in several ways:
This was the fourth postseason start of Lee's career. In all four starts, he went at least seven innings and gave up no more than one earned run. The only other starting pitcher ever to begin his postseason career with four such starts was Christy Mathewson.
He was also the first left-handed starter to beat the Yankees in The Bronx to open a World Series since Sandy Koufax in 1963.
He was the first starting pitcher to throw a complete game without giving up an earned run against the Yankees in Game 1 of a postseason series.
Lee was the first pitcher ever to strike out at least ten, walk no one, and give up no earned runs in a World Series start.
Prior to the game, Jay-Z and Alicia Keys performed the song "Empire State of Mind" for the Yankee Stadium crowd. This game marked the first postseason appearance of Pedro Martínez against the Yankees since the 2004 American League Championship Series, when he was with the Boston Red Sox and a part of the two teams' long standing rivalry; it was also the second-ever World Series start that Martínez made. There was much media interest in Martínez's "return to Yankee Stadium" for Game 2, as he told reporters at a pre-game press conference "When you have 60,000 people chanting your name, waiting for you to throw the ball, you have to consider yourself someone special, someone that really has a purpose out there."The Phillies scored first for the second game in a row, with Raúl Ibañez hitting a ground rule double and then scoring on a Matt Stairs RBI single off A. J. Burnett in the second inning.Mark Teixeira tied the game with a home run in the fourth inning, and Hideki Matsui broke the tie in the sixth with another homer. Martínez departed the game after giving up consecutive hits to Jerry Hairston, Jr. and Melky Cabrera to start the seventh inning, and reliever Chan Ho Park gave up an RBI single to Jorge Posada. With Cabrera at second base and Posada at first, Johnny Damon hit a low line drive at Phillies first baseman Ryan Howard. Howard grabbed the ball and threw to second where Posada was tagged and called out while standing on the base. First-base umpire Brian Gorman ruled that Howard had caught the ball in the air; thus, the result was an inning-ending double play. Both Posada and Joe Girardi vehemently protested the call, claiming that the batted ball had hit the ground before being caught; however, the umpires did not reverse the call. ESPN reported that Gorman blew the call. This was the first of two calls made by Gorman in Game Two that were heavily criticized.Burnett left the game after seven innings, having given up one run. He was replaced by Mariano Rivera in the eighth inning. With one out in the eighth, the Phillies put two runners on with a walk to Jimmy Rollins and a single by Shane Victorino. However, Chase Utley grounded into an inning-ending double play ending on a close play at first base. The play was the second disputed call made by umpire Brian Gorman in Game Two. Gorman himself later admitted he missed this call, saying, "on a freeze frame, it looks like there's a little bit of a ball outside [Teixeira's] glove when [Utley] hits the bag." Ultimately, Rivera threw 39 pitches and got six outs for his 38th postseason save, his tenth in World Series play.
The start of the game was postponed 80 minutes due to a rain delay, pushing the start time to 9:17 p.m. The cast of the television series Glee (with Amber Riley singing lead) performed the national anthem as part of a ceremony featuring a large American flag and several members of the armed services. The Phillies scored first with Jayson Werth's lead-off home run, which was followed by a bases-loaded walk and a sacrifice fly to make the score 3–0 in the bottom of the second inning. Following Mark Teixeira's walk in the top of the fourth inning, Alex Rodriguez hit a deep ball down the right field line. It was originally ruled a double so Teixeira held at third base. The play was reviewed using MLB instant replay, which revealed that the ball had struck a camera sticking over the top of the wall, so the ball was ruled a two-run home run, giving Rodriguez his first World Series hit. This was the first home run reviewed by instant replay in postseason play. Specifically, the ball hit a camera owned by Fox and MLB which extended slightly over the right field wall. The camera was moved back for Game 4 such that its lens was in line with the wall. Coincidentally, Alex Rodriguez also had the first regular season home run reviewed by replay.Nick Swisher opened the top of the fifth inning with a double and scored on a single to center field by Andy Pettitte. This was Pettitte's first career postseason RBI and the first RBI by a Yankees pitcher in a World Series since Jim Bouton in 1964. Derek Jeter followed Pettitte with another single, and both runners scored on a two-run double by Johnny Damon. Cole Hamels then walked Teixeira and was relieved by J. A. Happ. Happ closed out the fifth without allowing further scoring, but Nick Swisher added to the Yankees lead with a home run off of him in the sixth. Werth hit his second home run of the game leading off the bottom of the sixth to close the Yankees lead to 6–4, becoming the second Phillies player to hit multiple home runs in this World Series.
Chad Durbin relieved Happ in the top of the seventh. He walked Johnny Damon, who then stole second base. Rodriguez was then hit by a pitch, and Damon scored on a single by Jorge Posada. Joba Chamberlain relieved Pettitte in the bottom of the seventh and retired the side in order. Brett Myers retired the first two batters in the top of the eighth, but Hideki Matsui then hit a home run pinch hitting for Chamberlain. Phil Hughes pitched a third of an inning in the bottom of the ninth and allowed a solo home run to Carlos Ruiz before being relieved by Mariano Rivera. Rivera closed out the game, throwing just five pitches to record the final two outs. This game was Pettitte's 17th career postseason win, extending his MLB record.
Prior to the start of the game, Derek Jeter and Albert Pujols were named winners of the Hank Aaron Award for their offensive performances in 2009. This was the first game to test manager Joe Girardi's decision to use a three-man starting rotation, as CC Sabathia started the game on three days rest, a shorter period than he normally got during the regular season. Jeter led the game off with a single and advanced to third base on a double by Johnny Damon. Jeter scored via a Mark Teixeira ground out and Alex Rodriguez was hit by a pitch. Rodriguez was hit twice the night before and the umpires issued warnings to both benches. Jorge Posada then added to the Yankees lead that inning with a sacrifice fly. The Phillies answered quickly, scoring a run on successive doubles by Shane Victorino and Chase Utley in the bottom of the first. Sabathia intentionally walked Jayson Werth, but escaped the inning without further scoring. The Phillies tied the game in the bottom of the fourth as Ryan Howard singled, stole second, and scored on a single by Pedro Feliz. Although the run counted, instant replay of Howard's slide later showed that he did not touch home plate.Nick Swisher walked to lead off the fifth inning and advanced to second on a Melky Cabrera single. Swisher restored the Yankees' lead, scoring on a single by Jeter, and Cabrera added to it by scoring a run on a Damon single. Brett Gardner replaced Cabrera in center field as a defensive substitution in the bottom of the sixth inning after Cabrera left the game due to a hamstring injury. Chan Ho Park relieved Phillies starter Joe Blanton in the seventh and held the Yankees scoreless in that inning. Chase Utley hit his third home run of the series in the bottom of the seventh with two outs, bringing the game to 4–3. Dámaso Marte relieved Sabathia and got the final out of the seventh without further scoring.Ryan Madson relieved Park in the eighth and allowed a walk and a single but held the Yankees scoreless. Joba Chamberlain replaced Marte in the bottom of the inning. He struck out the first two batters he faced but allowed a game-tying home run to Feliz before closing the inning.Brad Lidge came into the game for the ninth inning, popping out Matsui and striking out Jeter before surrendering a two-out single to Damon—after a nine-pitch at bat with two strikes and four foul balls. Then, with Teixeira batting, Damon stole second and, on the same play, also stole third as the base was uncovered due to a defensive shift against Teixeira. Several news outlets referred to this as a "mad dash", which Mike Vaccaro of the New York Post compared to Enos Slaughter's "Mad Dash" in the 1946 World Series. Some believed that Damon's play caused Lidge to avoid throwing his best pitch—a slider with sharp downward movement—for the rest of the inning, as it risked a wild pitch that would have allowed Damon to score from third base. Teixeira was then hit by a pitch and Rodriguez put the Yankees ahead with a double, scoring Damon. Posada added to that lead with a single that scored Teixeira and Rodriguez, but was thrown out at second to end the inning. Mariano Rivera entered in the bottom of the ninth and saved the game for the Yankees on eight pitches for his second save of the series.
The Yankees replaced Melky Cabrera on their postseason roster with Ramiro Peña due to his injury in Game 4, while Brett Gardner took Cabrera's place in center field. A. J. Burnett, the Yankees' Game 2 starter, started Game 5 on three days rest, one less than the Phillies' Cliff Lee. The Yankees scored first in the first inning, with Johnny Damon reaching base with a single and then scoring on a two-out double by Alex Rodriguez. The Phillies responded in the bottom of the inning with a single by Jimmy Rollins, Shane Victorino reaching after being hit by a pitch, and finally a three-run home run by Chase Utley to take the lead. The Phillies added to their lead in the third inning with Utley and Ryan Howard drawing walks followed by RBI singles by Jayson Werth and Raúl Ibañez. With no outs in the inning, Burnett was relieved by David Robertson, who allowed another run to score on a Carlos Ruiz ground out.Robertson held the Phillies scoreless for a second inning in the fourth. Jorge Posada entered as a pinch hitter in the fifth inning for José Molina and grounded out. Eric Hinske then pinch hit for Robertson and walked, advanced to third on a Derek Jeter single, and scored on a ground out by Damon. Alfredo Aceves entered as the new Yankee pitcher in the bottom of the fifth. The first batter he faced, Jayson Werth, hit a deep drive to center field but it was caught for an out by Gardner, who collided with the outfield wall to complete the play. Aceves completed the inning without a run scoring, inducing ground outs from Ibáñez and Ruiz. Phil Coke relieved Aceves in the seventh inning and allowed two Phillies players to tie World Series records. First, Utley tied Reggie Jackson's record for most home runs in a World Series with a home run, his fifth of the series. Coke then struck out Howard, Howard's 12th strikeout in the series, tying Willie Wilson's record for most strikeouts in a World Series. Finally, Coke was driven from the game after allowing another home run, this time to Ibáñez, and was relieved by Phil Hughes.Victorino was replaced defensively in the eighth inning by Ben Francisco. Lee was driven from the game after allowing a single to Damon, followed by a double by Mark Teixeira, and then a double by Rodriguez that scored both runners. Chan Ho Park relieved Lee and induced a ground out from Nick Swisher, which advanced Rodriguez to third base. Rodriguez scored on a sacrifice fly by Robinson Canó. Ryan Madson entered in the ninth to close the game, allowing a double to Posada and a single to Hideki Matsui without recording an out. Batting with men on first and third base, Jeter grounded into a double play, allowing Posada to score but emptying the bases. Damon singled to bring Teixeira to bat as the potential tying run, but Madson struck him out to record his first World Series save. Members of the news media, such as Gene Wojciechowski, were critical of the three-man starting rotation strategy following Game 3, and contended that Burnett's poor performance was caused by insufficient rest in between starts. However, Burnett had been successful up to this point in such situations, going 4–0 with a 2.33 ERA in four career starts on short rest (less than the normal four days between starts) before this game.
This game was the first Game 6 in a World Series since the 2003 World Series six years earlier, the longest such gap in the history of the World Series. Mary J. Blige, a Bronx native, performed "The Star-Spangled Banner". Andy Pettitte started on three days rest, the third straight game in which the Yankees fielded a pitcher on short rest. The Phillies started Pedro Martínez, who called himself and opposing pitcher Andy Pettitte "old goats" and acknowledged that Red Sox fans were rooting for him: "I know that they don't like the Yankees to win, not even in Nintendo games."The Yankees scored first with an Alex Rodriguez walk opening the bottom of the second inning followed by a two-run home run by designated hitter Hideki Matsui. The Phillies quickly responded with a triple by Carlos Ruiz who then scored on a sacrifice fly from Jimmy Rollins in the top of the third. Matsui answered back, adding to the Yankees lead again with a single with the bases loaded in the bottom of the third, scoring Derek Jeter and Johnny Damon. Damon, injured running the bases while scoring, was replaced defensively in the top of the fourth by Jerry Hairston, Jr.
Phillies starter Pedro Martínez was removed after allowing four runs in four innings, relieved in the fifth by Chad Durbin. Durbin allowed a ground rule double to Jeter, who advanced to third on a sacrifice bunt by Hairston and scored on a single by Mark Teixeira. Durbin then hit Rodriguez with a pitch and was relieved by J. A. Happ after recording just one out. Happ allowed a two-run double to Matsui, his fifth and sixth RBI of the game, which tied a World Series record for most RBI in a single game set by Bobby Richardson in the 1960 World Series.The Phillies made the game closer in the top of the sixth inning, as Chase Utley drew a walk and Ryan Howard followed him with a two-run home run, bringing the score to 7–3. After Raúl Ibañez hit a double into right field, Joba Chamberlain relieved Andy Pettitte and closed the sixth without allowing the Phillies to score. Chan Ho Park came in for Happ, ending any Yankees threat that inning. Chamberlain was relieved by Dámaso Marte in the top of the seventh after allowing two baserunners, but Marte struck out Utley to end the inning scoreless. After Park allowed a single to Rodriguez, Scott Eyre replaced him. Eyre allowed Rodriguez to steal second and intentionally walked Jorge Posada but escaped the inning without allowing a run.Marte recorded one out, a strikeout of Howard, in the top of the eighth inning. With it Howard set a new World Series record for most strikeouts by a hitter in a single series with a total of 13. After the out, Marte was relieved by Yankees closer Mariano Rivera in a non-save situation. Rivera allowed a double to Ibáñez, but no runs, in the eighth. After retiring the first two batters in the eighth, Eyre gave way to Ryan Madson, who allowed a single to Jeter before ending the bottom of the eighth inning. Matt Stairs led off the ninth as a pinch hitter, but lined out. Ruiz worked a walk from Rivera, but successive outs by Rollins and Victorino ended the game 7–3 to clinch the World Series for the Yankees. Pettitte added to his own record for most playoff wins, bringing his career total to 18.
For the tenth consecutive year in the United States, Fox Sports televised the Series. Joe Buck called play-by-play and Tim McCarver provided analysis. The Series was also broadcast on ESPN Radio, with Jon Miller and Joe Morgan calling the action. Fox Sports en Español also broadcast the Series for the US Spanish-speaking audience. The flagship radio stations of the respective teams broadcast all Series games with their local announcers. In Philadelphia, WPHT carried the Phillies' English-language broadcasts, with Scott Franzke, Larry Andersen, Tom McCarthy, Gary Matthews, and Chris Wheeler announcing, while WUBA aired the team's Spanish broadcasts. In New York, WCBS-AM carried the Yankees' English broadcasts with John Sterling and Suzyn Waldman announcing. This broadcast made Waldman the first woman to announce a World Series game on radio. XM Satellite Radio offered multiple feeds of each game to its subscribers.
Television ratings for the 2009 World Series were excellent. Game 1 attracted 19.5 million viewers, second only to the opening of the 2004 World Series for a series opener since 2000 and 29% higher than 2008's opening game. Game 4 produced the highest total viewership of the series with 22.8 million viewers, the highest for any World Series game since 2004 and the highest for a "non-decisive Game 4" since 2001. At 11.7 overall, the 2009 World Series was at the time the highest rated World Series since 2004 and the one of the only World Series to average double digits since 2007, the other being the 2016 World Series.
Many players with both teams won awards for their performances during the 2009 season. Teixeira and Jeter each won a Gold Glove and Silver Slugger Award; Jimmy Rollins and Shane Victorino won Gold Gloves, as well; and Chase Utley won a Silver Slugger Award. Rivera was named the 2009 DHL Delivery Man of the Year, as well as Sporting News' Pro Athlete of the Year. Along with the Hank Aaron Award announced before Game 4, Jeter won the Roberto Clemente Award and was named Sports Illustrated's Sportsman of the Year for 2009. Matsui won the World Series MVP for his play, becoming the first Japanese player and first full-time designated hitter to win the award. Several items related to the series were sent to the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum including bats from Jeter and Matsui; caps from Rivera, Lee, and Pettitte; and Johnny Damon's cleats.Matsui also joined Minnesota Twins radio analyst Dan Gladden as members from the 1994 world championship Yomiuri Giants team as players who have won championships in North America and Japan.
The series win brought the Yankees' franchise championship total to 27, more than any other North American professional sports franchise. This championship came in the Yankees' first year in their new stadium. They had also won the 1923 World Series, the opening year of the previous Yankee Stadium. The victory was noted by some sportswriters as a personal success for Alex Rodriguez, winning his first championship and succeeding in the playoffs where some had previously claimed he was a "choker and a loser". Prior to this series, Rodriguez had appeared in 2,166 regular season games without a World Series appearance, then the second-most among active players to Ken Griffey, Jr.The Yankees' victory was credited to a number of different sources. Many players drew praise for their performances, including Series MVP Hideki Matsui; free agents signed the previous offseason including Mark Teixeira, CC Sabathia, and A. J. Burnett; and the so-called "Core Four" of Derek Jeter, Mariano Rivera, Andy Pettitte, and Jorge Posada, who had all played a large role in the Yankees' past success in the 1990s. Manager Joe Girardi was also credited for his management of the team, particularly in his decision to use only three starting pitchers in the Yankees postseason starting rotation. The Yankees were the first team to use only three starters in a World Series since the San Diego Padres in the 1998 Series.Several members of the Yankees franchise dedicated the World Series in part to team owner George Steinbrenner, who had recently stepped back from his once prominent position with the team. Steinbrenner died on the day of the All-Star Game the following season at the age of 80. On November 6, a victory parade took place for the Yankees in the "Canyon of Heroes" in Manhattan, New York City. The Yankees sent a group of players, coach Tony Peña, and team Senior Vice President Felix Lopez with the Commissioner's Trophy to the Dominican Republic in early January 2010 to meet with President Leonel Fernández. Most of the 2009 Yankees received their championship rings on Opening Day the next season. Matsui was on the Angels in 2010 and when the Angels played their first series of the season in the Bronx, the Yankees home opener, they presented him with his ring. They also visited U.S. President Barack Obama in the White House in April 2010, presenting him with a signed jersey.The Yankees returned to the playoffs the following season, as the wild card. They lost to the Texas Rangers in the 2010 ALCS; which included an 8-0 shutout in Yankee Stadium by former Phillie ace Cliff Lee; it was Lee's seventh straight postseason win which included three victories against the Yankees (two as a Phillie in the 2009 World Series, and in 2010 during the ALCS).
Following Game 4, after the Yankees took a 3–1 series lead, The Philadelphia Inquirer accidentally printed a three-quarters-page Macy's advertisement congratulating the Phillies for winning the World Series, along with a picture of a Phillies championship T-shirt. The newspaper subsequently apologized for the mistake.Lee Jenkins of Sports Illustrated attributed Philadelphia's loss to a lack of pitching depth, noting that three different Yankees starters managed to win games in the series, while only Cliff Lee won games for the Phillies. The Phillies' 2008 postseason star pitchers, starter Cole Hamels and closer Brad Lidge, struggled in their only appearances of the 2009 World Series. The Phillies bullpen which did well in the NLCS performed poorly in the World Series, allowing seven runs in just 11 2/3 innings with a 5.40 ERA. Jorge Arangure Jr. of ESPN partially attributed the Phillies' loss to their lack of offensive production, citing the team's .227 batting average in the World Series. Only Chase Utley performed well with 5 home runs and 22 of the Phillies' 90 bases, while Shane Victorino and Jimmy Rollins struggled at the plate, and Ryan Howard struck out a record 13 times in the World Series after his NLCS MVP performance.Before the start of the 2010 season, the Phillies traded away their 2009 postseason ace pitcher Cliff Lee. The Phillies posted the league's best record in 2010, and returned to the playoffs where they lost to the eventual champions the San Francisco Giants in the NLCS.
Among those in attendance during Game 1 was New York Governor David Paterson, whose party had five tickets behind home plate.  On March 3, 2010, the New York Commission on Public Integrity found that Paterson had violated state laws concerning gifts to public officials, and that he lied under oath to the commission about his intent to pay for the tickets. The commission further found that Paterson used his position to solicit and receive the five tickets—valued at US$425 each—free of charge from the Yankees, that he had never intended to pay for the tickets despite testimony to the contrary, and that he or a person acting on his behalf wrote a backdated check to pay for them only after scrutiny in the case arose. The Commission ultimately fined Paterson $62,125 for his actions.

The 2010 PapaJohns.com Bowl was a postseason college football bowl game between the South Carolina Gamecocks of the Southeastern Conference (SEC) and the Connecticut Huskies (UConn) of the Big East Conference, on January 2, 2010 at Legion Field in Birmingham, Alabama.  The game was the final contest of the 2009 NCAA Division I-Football Bowl Subdivision (Division I-FBS) football season for both teams, and it ended in a 20–7 victory for Connecticut.
South Carolina had 7–5 regular-season, highlighted by wins over then-No. 4 Mississippi and then-No. 15 Clemson. The Gamecocks faced Connecticut. The Huskies were selected to play in the 2010 PapaJohns.com Bowl following a tumultuous 7–5 regular season that included five losses by a total of just fifteen points, a double-overtime victory at Notre Dame, and the murder of cornerback Jasper Howard. Pregame coverage focused on the tragedy that marked the Huskies' season, as well as on head coaches Steve Spurrier of South Carolina and Randy Edsall of Connecticut.
Connecticut scored twice in the first quarter: on a one-handed 37-yard touchdown reception by wide receiver Kashif Moore and then on a 33-yard field goal after South Carolina failed to convert a fourth-down play at its 32-yard line.  Running back Andre Dixon scored for UConn on a 10-yard rush early in the fourth quarter.  South Carolina scored its sole touchdown after the game had effectively been decided, on a two-yard run by Brian Maddox.
Dixon was named player of the game, and finished with 126 rushing yards and one touchdown.  Connecticut wide receiver Marcus Easley and South Carolina linebacker Eric Norwood were among four players from the teams to be selected in the subsequent 2010 National Football League (NFL) Draft.
In 2010, the PapaJohns.com Bowl selection committee had a contractual arrangement with the Big East and the SEC that allowed the committee to pick one team from each conference.  The Big East had had a contractual bowl bid to the game since its inception in 2006. The SEC agreed to send its ninth bowl-eligible team to the bowl starting in 2008, but did not have enough bowl-eligible teams in either 2008 or 2009 to take advantage of the bid. In 2010, the SEC received $900,000 for sending a team to the game, while the Big East received $600,000.The Big East's contract with the bowl committee stated that the group would make its selection in coordination with the International Bowl and the St. Petersburg Bowl after other Big East-affiliated bowl games made their selections.  Conference champion Cincinnati was awarded an automatic Bowl Championship Series (BCS) berth in the 2010 Sugar Bowl. The Gator Bowl had the first pick after the BCS, and selected West Virginia. The Meineke Car Care Bowl, which had the next selection, considered both Pittsburgh, which had the better regular-season record, and Rutgers, whose fans had a better traveling reputation; it selected Pittsburgh.Three bowl-eligible Big East teams remained: Connecticut, Rutgers, and South Florida.  The previous two years, Rutgers had played in the 2008 International Bowl and the 2008 PapaJohns.com Bowl. In the same period, South Florida played in the 2007 PapaJohns.com Bowl and the 2008 St. Petersburg Bowl.  Connecticut had played in the 2009 International Bowl the previous year.  In general, bowl games and conferences prefer to have different teams play in each game each year.  Partly because of this, Rutgers went to the 2009 St. Petersburg Bowl, South Florida to the 2010 International Bowl, and Connecticut to the 2010 PapaJohns.com Bowl.For Connecticut's opponent, the PapaJohns.com Bowl had the right to select a SEC team, but only after all other bowls with contracts with the SEC made their selections.  Conference champion Alabama finished No. 1 in the BCS standings and earned a berth to the 2010 BCS National Championship Game.  Conference championship game loser Florida took the SEC champion's automatic slot in the 2010 Sugar Bowl, vacant since Alabama was selected to appear in the national championship game.  The Capital One Bowl had the next selection and opted for Louisiana State University (LSU). The Cotton Bowl and Outback Bowl selected Ole Miss and Auburn respectively. The Chick-fil-A Bowl, which had the next pick, selected Tennessee.  The next selections were shared by the Liberty Bowl and Music City Bowl, which opted for Arkansas and Kentucky, respectively.  The Independence Bowl, with the next-to-last selection, picked Georgia, leaving the PapaJohns.com Bowl with the last available bowl-eligible SEC team, South Carolina.The game was the first meeting between the two schools and the first PapaJohns.com Bowl appearance for each. The game was the 30th anniversary of South Carolina's last postseason game at Legion Field, in the December 1979 Hall of Fame Bowl, and it was the 20th anniversary of head coach Steve Spurrier's last Legion Field bowl game, with Duke in the December 1989 All-American Bowl.
The South Carolina Gamecocks went 7–6 in 2008, losing their final three games, including the 2009 Outback Bowl against Iowa, by a combined score of 118–30. Steve Spurrier was named head coach of the Gamecocks in 2005; in his four seasons in charge of the program, the team had a combined record of 28–21 and was bowl-eligible every year.
South Carolina opened its 2009 season with a win against North Carolina State.  Their next game, against No. 21 Georgia, featured a kickoff returned for a touchdown, an interception returned for a touchdown, a safety, a blocked extra point attempt, and 24 penalties.  In the end, quarterback Stephen Garcia's pass on 4th-and-4 from the 7-yard line with 22 seconds remaining was batted down by the defense and fell incomplete, preserving a 41–37 win for Georgia.  South Carolina proceeded to beat Florida Atlantic 38–16.In their next contest, South Carolina faced No. 4 Mississippi, and came away with a 16–10 upset; the Gamecocks had lost their previous 22 games against AP top 5 teams.  Next up was a win against in-state Division I-FCS opponent South Carolina State  With the victory, the Gamecocks earned their first Top 25 ranking of the 2009 season, appearing in the AP Poll at No. 25.  South Carolina finished the first half of their season against SEC opponent Kentucky.  Defensive end Cliff Matthews knocked down Kentucky's pass attempt on what would have been a game-tying two-point conversion to preserve the 28–26 win.  After six games, the Gamecocks had a record of 5–1 overall, 2–1 in the SEC, and were a consensus No. 22 in the AP, Coaches', and Harris polls.
After winning five of their first six games, the Gamecocks proceeded to lose four of their next five.  Against No. 2 Alabama, eventual Heisman Trophy-winning running back Mark Ingram ran for a then-career record 246 yards and a touchdown; South Carolina lost 20–6. The defeat dropped the Gamecocks to No. 23 in the AP and Coaches' polls, and out of the Harris poll altogether; in the first BCS standings released that week, the Gamecocks were ranked 24th.  South Carolina came back to beat Vanderbilt 14–10; the Gamecocks rose to No. 21 in all three polls, and No. 22 in the following week's BCS standings. The next game, against Tennessee, was never close; South Carolina fell behind 21–0 early in the second quarter and lost 31–13.  The loss caused the Gamecocks to fall out of all three polls as well as the BCS standings.  South Carolina then faced Arkansas, who scored 23 unanswered points on their way to delivering the Gamecocks a 33–16 loss.  The following game was against No. 1 Florida, who was undefeated.  South Carolina was within three points of Florida as the fourth quarter began, but Garcia was subsequently sacked four times and intercepted twice; Florida won 24–14.  The Gamecocks' record fell to 6–5 overall, 3–5 within the SEC.After a bye week, South Carolina closed out their regular season with a game against their fierce in-state rivals, the No. 15 Clemson Tigers, who had already clinched a berth in the 2009 ACC Championship Game that would be played the next week.  Clemson star running back C. J. Spiller returned the opening kickoff for a touchdown; he was held to 18 yards rushing the rest of the game.  The Gamecocks scored 24 unanswered points to take a 24–7 lead through three quarters, and matched the Tigers the rest of the way to win 34–17.  This win gave South Carolina a final regular season record of 7–5 overall, 3–5 in the SEC.
The Connecticut Huskies finished 8–5 in 2008, ending the season with a victory in the 2009 International Bowl.  The departure of running back Donald Brown—the NCAA rushing leader in 2008—as well as three other Huskies selected in the first two rounds of the 2009 NFL Draft, was expected to hurt the team. In the Big East preseason media poll, the Huskies were picked to finish sixth in the conference.
The Huskies opened the 2009 season at Ohio University, and never trailed in the game, winning 23–16.  UConn's next game was its home opener, versus No. 19 North Carolina. Connecticut led 10–0 through three quarters, but North Carolina tied the game with 2:36 left and took the lead when UConn was called for a holding penalty in its end zone, which by rule resulted in a safety.  North Carolina won the game 12–10. Connecticut rebounded in its next game at Baylor, winning 30–22; they then faced Division I-Football Championship Subdivision (Division I-FCS) opponent Rhode Island, an historic rival of the team, and defeated them 52–10.The Huskies opened Big East conference play at the Pittsburgh Panthers.  UConn held a 21–6 lead with less than four minutes left in the third quarter, but Pittsburgh rallied to win with a field goal as time expired.  Connecticut closed the first half of its season versus Big East opponent Louisville on homecoming weekend.  In the third quarter, with UConn leading 21–13, Louisville running back Bilal Powell ran off left tackle near the end zone. He was caught by cornerback Jasper Howard, who forced a fumble.  Connecticut kicked a field goal on the ensuing drive and won the game 38–25, giving the Huskies a 4–2 overall record, 1–1 within the Big East conference.
Later that night, Howard and several other UConn football players were at a dance at the Student Union Center on the Connecticut campus.  At 12:26 am a fire alarm sounded, forcing the evacuation of the building.  As the students exited, an altercation broke out between a group of UConn football players and a group of non-students.  The attackers brandished knives and stabbed Howard before fleeing.  Howard was taken by ambulance to Windham Community Memorial Hospital, and then evacuated by helicopter to St. Francis Hospital in Hartford, where he was pronounced dead. Coach Randy Edsall was summoned to identify the body. Howard's murder was the first homicide on UConn's campus in more than thirty years.Connecticut's next game, one week after Howard's death, was at West Virginia.  In a close-run game, Connecticut lost 28–24 after West Virginia responded to the Huskies' late go-ahead score with one of its own.  Two days after the game, the entire UConn team traveled to Howard's hometown of Miami, Florida, for his funeral. The next game, the first at Rentschler Field since Howard's death, was against Rutgers.  Connecticut came back in the fourth quarter to take a 24–21 lead with 38 seconds remaining; Rutgers completed an 81-yard touchdown pass one play later to win 28–24.  UConn also lost the game that followed, 47–45, at undefeated No. 5 Cincinnati.   After three straight losses, the Huskies' record dropped to 4–5 overall; 1–4 in the Big East.  The losses to this point were by a combined total of 15 points.
Connecticut's next game was a nationally televised appearance at the Notre Dame Fighting Irish.  The Irish scored two touchdowns early but the Huskies responded with a touchdown and a field goal.  Notre Dame expanded its lead to 17–10 in the third quarter, but Todman ran back the ensuing kickoff 96 yards for a game-tying touchdown.  In the fourth quarter, Notre Dame once again took the lead on a 23-yard field goal; after two touchdown-scoring running plays were negated by holding penalties, Connecticut tied the score on a 29-yard field goal with 1:10 left, sending the game into overtime.  The teams traded touchdowns in the first overtime, and the Huskies won the game with a touchdown in the second overtime. Edsall stated that the game was the "best win" in UConn football history.Connecticut finished the regular season by beating Syracuse and South Florida at home.  The South Florida game, played as snow fell on Rentschler Field, was won on a last-second 42-yard field goal by kicker Dave Teggart.  The two wins gave UConn a final regular season record of 7–5 overall, 3–4 in the Big East. They finished in a three-way tie with Rutgers and South Florida for fourth place in the conference.
In the weeks preceding the game, media coverage focused on the tragic circumstances surrounding the Huskies' season. On December 21, 2010, the team was declared the winner of the 2009 FedEx Orange Bowl/FWAA Courage Award, given to a person or team who displayed courage on or off the field, overcame injury or physical handicap, prevented a disaster, or lived through hardship.  The award was presented at the 2010 Orange Bowl on January 5, 2011, following the PapaJohns.com Bowl.Edsall was praised for coaching the Huskies to a successful season despite the off-field distractions.  By appearing in the 2010 PapaJohns.com Bowl, UConn made its third straight bowl appearance and fourth since joining the Big East for the 2004 season. There were rumors that Edsall was a candidate for the Notre Dame head coaching position, vacated by the firing of Charlie Weis.  On December 11, Cincinnati coach Brian Kelly was given the Notre Dame job; Edsall remained with Connecticut.Pregame coverage also discussed the performance of Steve Spurrier as head coach of South Carolina.  His Gamecock teams had been competitive in the SEC, but were unable to win championships; during his tenure to that point, they had finished no higher than second in the SEC East division.  Nevertheless, analysts described him as one of "the game's better minds and motivators" and "still one of the craftiest coaches around".  The 2010 PapaJohns.com Bowl marked Spurrier's return to Birmingham; in the United States Football League he competed against the local Birmingham Stallions as head coach of the Tampa Bay Bandits from 1983 to 1985.  Legion Field was also the home of the 1992 and 1993 SEC Championship Games; teams coached by Spurrier participated in both contests.
The Gamecocks struggled offensively for most of 2009, ranking only 76th in total offense and 96th in scoring.  Their offense was quarterbacked by Stephen Garcia.  A highly touted prospect coming out of high school, Garcia had a breakout season in 2009, finishing second in the SEC with 2,733 passing yards—more than former Heisman Trophy-winning Florida quarterback Tim Tebow—and 17 touchdowns against nine interceptions.  Freshman wide receiver Alshon Jeffery was Garcia's most frequent passing target; he caught 43 passes for 735 yards and six touchdowns.  Although South Carolina's passing attack had success, its running game was the worst in the SEC and 91st nationally.  The Gamecocks' offensive line struggled, ranking 104th in sacks allowed.  It did not help matters that Eric Wolford, the running game coordinator and offensive line coach, left the team before the bowl game to become head coach at Youngstown State.
The Connecticut offense was led by the rushing attack of running backs Jordan Todman and Andre Dixon, who were described as "one of the best running-back tandems in the nation".  The two combined for 27 touchdowns and more than 2,100 rushing yards during the regular season.  South Carolina linebacker Eric Norwood described Todman as a speedy back, with "that burst and that breakaway speed to go with it", and compared him to Clemson running back C. J. Spiller.  In contrast, Norwood described Dixon as a "taller, more downhill back, vertical guy".In previous seasons, UConn had been largely dependent on running the ball; the team developed more balance in 2009, ranking 41st of 120 Division I FBS teams nationally in rushing offense and 46th in passing. Marcus Easley's emergence as a productive wide receiver was key to the development of the Huskies' passing attack.  A former walk-on who entered the season with only five career receptions, he led Connecticut in receiving in 2009 with 44 catches for 853 yards and eight touchdowns.  Quarterback Zach Frazer was inconsistent in the early season. He was injured in the game against North Carolina, but regained his starting role after backup Cody Endres was hurt in the Rutgers game later in the season.  In UConn's four games before the bowl, Frazer performed well; he threw six touchdown passes against only two interceptions and helped the Huskies score an average of 41 points per game.  Experts felt Frazer would need to have a good performance for Connecticut to have a chance to win.
South Carolina had a strong defense, especially against the pass; the Gamecocks were 15th in the nation in total defense, 22nd in scoring defense, 46th in run defense, and 12th in passing defense.  The Gamecock defense was led by linebacker Eric Norwood.  Described as "one of the most disruptive defenders in the country", Norwood was a three-time All-SEC selection and had compiled seven sacks on the season, tied for third-best in the conference.  He was South Carolina's all-time leader in both sacks and tackles for loss.
Connecticut had a weaker defense in 2010 than in previous seasons.  The Huskies were 72nd in total defense, 60th in scoring defense, 48th against the run, and 94th against the pass.  UConn's pass defense was hurt by the loss of Jasper Howard; following his death, freshman cornerback Blidi Wreh-Wilson was forced into the starting lineup alongside senior Robert McClain.  Top performers for the Connecticut defense included defensive end Lindsey Witten, who led the Big East with 11.5 sacks, and linebacker Lawrence Wilson, who led the Big East and was fourth in the nation with 136 tackles, averaging over 11 per game.
The game started at 1:04 pm CST on Saturday, January 2, 2010, at Legion Field in Birmingham, Alabama. Official attendance for the game was 45,254.  The Gamecocks sold 8,593 tickets of their 10,000-ticket allotment; South Carolina coach Steve Spurrier estimated about 30,000 of the fans in attendance supported the Gamecocks.  UConn sold or distributed only 4,500 of its 10,000 tickets for the game.  The game was telecast on ESPN, with Dave Neal and Andre Ware in the broadcasting booth and Cara Capuano reporting from the sidelines. The temperature at kickoff was around 35 °F (2 °C), abnormally cold for Birmingham at that time of year.  Game officials were:
Connecticut kicked off to South Carolina to begin the game.  The Gamecocks gained only a single yard in three plays on their first possession, forcing them to punt the ball back to the Huskies.  UConn proceeded to also gain only one yard; they punted the ball back to South Carolina.  After another Gamecock punt, the Huskies took over at their 34-yard line and earned a first down—the first of the game—after three consecutive Dixon rushing plays.  Two completed passes to Marcus Easley earned Connecticut a second first down, moving them to the South Carolina 39-yard line.  After a two-yard Jordan Todman run and an incomplete pass, Zach Frazer threw a pass down the right sideline ahead of Kashif Moore.  Reaching out, Moore made a one-handed running catch into the end zone for the first touchdown of the game.  After the extra point conversion, Connecticut led 7–0 with 6:37 left in the quarter.South Carolina regained possession on their 26-yard line following the kickoff, but was only able to advance the ball nine yards in three plays.  Rather than punt the ball, the Gamecocks attempted to gain a first down on 4th-and-1 at the 32-yard line.  Steven Garcia's quarterback sneak attempt was stopped for no gain by the UConn defense, returning the ball to Connecticut on loss of downs. The Huskies began their next drive in a favorable position due to the Gamecocks' turnover on downs.  A 16-yard run by Todman advanced the ball to the South Carolina 16-yard line, where Connecticut's offense was stymied by South Carolina's defense. Dave Teggart made a 33-yard field goal, giving the Huskies a 10–0 lead with 3:35 left in the quarter. On the ensuing possession, South Carolina again went three-and-out, punting the ball to Connecticut.  The Huskies began driving down the field, collecting two first downs before the first quarter ended.  At the end of the first quarter, UConn held a 10–0 lead.
Beginning the second quarter with a 1st-and-10 at their 44-yard line, Connecticut failed to make progress and punted.  After the Gamecocks again went three-and-out and punted, the Huskies tried a trick pass from Todman to Easley that fell incomplete. After that, the Huskies advanced the ball off short runs by Dixon and Todman, and passes from Frazer to Easley and Moore. South Carolina stopped UConn's drive at the 27-yard line; Connecticut settled for a 44-yard field goal that extended its lead to 13–0.Garcia led the Gamecocks on their next drive, either passing or rushing himself on every play except the last.  After a first-down sack by Kendall Reyes pushed South Carolina back to its 18-yard line, the Gamecocks advanced the ball to the Connecticut 35-yard line.  On 4th-and-10, Stephen Flint was tackled nine yards behind the line of scrimmage, returning the ball to UConn on loss of downs.  The two teams traded punts until halftime; Connecticut still held a 13–0 lead.
The Huskies received the ball to start the half, but were unable to obtain a first down after three straight running plays.  UConn punted; South Carolina was called for roughing the kicker, giving Connecticut a first down after the penalty.  After two plays netted no yardage, UConn threw a pass on 3rd-and-10 that fell incomplete.  The Gamecocks were called for a personal foul, again giving the Huskies a first down.  Connecticut advanced the ball to the South Carolina 26-yard line, but Frazer fumbled; the ball was recovered by South Carolina.The Gamecocks responded with a drive that earned two first downs.  After a sack on third down by Lawrence Wilson, South Carolina punted.  The Gamecocks got the ball back on their 8-yard line after the Huskies went three-and-out.  After two first downs and a 15-yard personal foul penalty against it, South Carolina faced a 1st-and-10 on its 26-yard line. Garcia fumbled, and the ball was recovered by Scott Lutrus of UConn at the 35-yard line.  Four Dixon rushing plays advanced the ball to the 24-yard line; the quarter expired with the Huskies leading 13–0 and in good position to expand their margin.
Less than two minutes into the fourth quarter, UConn struck again.  On his fifth run of the quarter, Dixon rushed into the end zone from ten yards out, giving Connecticut a 20–0 lead and effectively putting the game away as South Carolina would need three scores to take the lead.  The two teams exchanged three-and-outs before South Carolina began a drive that penetrated Connecticut territory; however, South Carolina was soon pushed back to its 47-yard-line. On 4th-and-19, Garcia threw a deep pass that was intercepted by safety Robert Vaughn on the UConn 7-yard line.After three Dixon runs failed to get a first down, Connecticut punted; the kick by Desi Cullen was partially blocked, and South Carolina recovered the ball at the UConn 40-yard line. Garcia promptly completed his deepest pass of the game, a 38-yard connection to wide receiver D.L. Moore.  The Gamecocks scored on the next play, a two-yard run by Brian Maddox, which ended the Huskies' bid for a shutout.  South Carolina attempted an onside kick to retain possession, but Connecticut recovered the ball. Dixon drove UConn to within the Gamecock 2-yard line; rather than running up the score, the Huskies were content to run out the clock.  Connecticut won the game 20–7.
For his performance in the 2010 PapaJohns.com Bowl, Connecticut running back Andre Dixon was named the player of the game.  Dixon rushed for 126 yards and a touchdown on 33 carries, giving him 1,093 rushing yards on the year; he became the 12th UConn player to rush for 1,000 yards in a single season.  Jordan Todman carried the ball nine times for 36 yards; his 1,118 rushing yards on the season made Connecticut one of three teams in Division I-FBS to have at least two players rush for over 1,000 yards in 2009.  Wide receiver Kashif Moore was credited with one rushing attempt for one yard, while quarterback Zach Frazer carried the ball twice for a loss of 13 yards.In the UConn passing game, Frazer completed 9 of 21 passes for 107 yards and a touchdown, with no interceptions. Todman attempted one pass that fell incomplete.  Marcus Easley caught four passes for 40 yards; Moore caught two passes for 40 yards and a touchdown.  Moore had two pass receptions for 26 yards, while Todman caught one pass for a single yard.For South Carolina, quarterback Stephen Garcia completed 16 of 38 passes for 129 yards and no touchdowns.  He threw one interception, to Connecticut safety Robert Vaughn; this was the fifth consecutive game in which Garcia had thrown an interception.  He turned over the ball a second time on a fumble recovered by UConn. Garcia was also the Gamecocks' leading rusher; he ran the ball 15 times for 56 yards.  The South Carolina rushing attack was supplemented by running backs Kenny Miles, who had six carries for 24 yards; Bryce Sherman, who had two carries for three yards; and Brian Maddox, who had two carries for two yards and scored the Gamecocks' only touchdown.  Wide receiver Stephen Flint lost nine yards on one rushing attempt.  In the receiving game, wide receiver D. L. Moore led the team in yardage, with 38 yards on one reception. The leading Gamecock receiver of the season, Alshon Jeffery, had three catches for 28 yards, all in the first half.  Running back Kenny Miles had four receptions for 23 yards, while wide receiver Jason Barnes had two catches for 21 yards. Garcia's remaining passes were caught by wide receiver Tori Gurley, who had three catches for 14 yards; Moe Brown, who caught one pass for 12 yards; and tight end Weslye Saunders, who lost seven yards on two receptions.South Carolina did not gain a first down until its second drive of the second quarter, when Garcia completed a 19-yard pass to Alshon Jeffery on 3rd-and-16. Maddox's late touchdown allowed the Gamecocks to avoid their first shutout in three seasons. UConn did not commit a single penalty.
With the win, Connecticut finished the season with a final record of 8–5; South Carolina fell to 7–6. Financially, both teams roughly broke even on the game: the Huskies were given an expense allowance of about $1.2 million from the Big East and spent just over $1 million, while the Gamecocks received just under $1 million from the SEC and spent about $900,000.In the postgame press conference, South Carolina coach Steve Spurrier said:
"The first thing I want to do, and hopefully half the team does, is apologize to about 30,000 Gamecocks that came down here to see a football game, and we couldn't put one on.  I thought we were ready to play. I thought we practiced pretty well. But obviously our offense was very sad, our defense not as good as it's been most of the time. We thoroughly got beat by a better team, a better-disciplined team."
Throughout the offseason, Spurrier apologized for his team's performance, held himself accountable for the loss, and promised the team would perform significantly better the next season.  Acknowledging that the team had underperformed expectations, he promised he would resign or retire rather than let the program degenerate to the point where he might be fired or forced out.Both teams made assistant coaching changes in the offseason.  Less than 24 hours after the conclusion of the PapaJohns.com Bowl, South Carolina announced new offensive line coach Shawn Elliott, who previously worked at Appalachian State.  Two Connecticut assistants left for other jobs: defensive backs coach Scott Lakatos went to Georgia, while tight ends coach Dave McMichael departed for West Virginia.  They were replaced with new defensive backs coach Darrell Perkins, who previously coached at Louisiana-Monroe, and new tight ends coach Jonathan Wholley, a member of the UConn football team between 2001–04 who most recently coached at Fordham.The Gamecocks performed better in 2010. With a 36–14 win over Florida, South Carolina won the SEC East division and clinched a spot in the SEC Championship Game for the first time in school history.  South Carolina finished 2010 on a down note, however, as they lost the championship game 56–17 to eventual 2011 BCS National Championship Game winner Auburn and then lost the 2010 Chick-fil-A Bowl 26–17 to Florida State.Connecticut began the 2010 season with a 30–10 loss at Michigan. They dropped to 3–4 after seven games with losses to Temple, Rutgers, and Louisville as Zach Frazer was benched and Cody Endres was dismissed from the team.  Frazer returned as the starter and the Huskies turned their season around by winning five straight games, good enough to win a share of the Big East conference championship and the right to play in a BCS bowl, even though they were not ranked in the final BCS standings.  UConn played in the 2011 Fiesta Bowl, losing 48–20 to Oklahoma.  Following the game, coach Randy Edsall left the Huskies to take the head coaching position at Maryland.Multiple players from the 2010 PapaJohns.com Bowl went on to play professional football; both teams had two players selected in the 2010 National Football League (NFL) Draft.  For UConn, wide receiver Marcus Easley was selected in the fourth round by the Buffalo Bills, and cornerback Robert McClain was selected in the seventh round by the Carolina Panthers. Gamecock linebacker Eric Norwood was selected in the fourth round by the Panthers. Defensive end Clifton Geathers, selected in the sixth round by the Cleveland Browns, was the other South Carolina player drafted.The 2010 PapaJohns.com Bowl was the final game by that name.  Although Papa John's had an option to renew its sponsorship for two years, it decided not to because of rising costs. The company instead opted to refocus its marketing dollars on the NFL and its sponsorship of Louisville's home field, Papa John's Cardinal Stadium. The game's name changed to the BBVA Compass Bowl starting with the 2011 contest.  Per the bowl's website, the 2010 PapaJohns.com Bowl remains the game in the bowl series with the greatest economic impact, at $18.4 million.

The 2010 Sylvania 300 was a stock car racing competition that took place on September 19, 2010. Held at New Hampshire Motor Speedway in Loudon, New Hampshire, the 300-lap race was the twenty-seventh in the 2010 NASCAR Sprint Cup Series, as well as the first in the ten-race Chase for the Sprint Cup, which ended the season. Clint Bowyer of the Richard Childress Racing team won the race; Denny Hamlin finished second and Jamie McMurray came in third.
Brad Keselowski won the pole position, although he was almost immediately passed by Tony Stewart at the start of the race. Many Chase for the Sprint Cup participants, including Jimmie Johnson, Kurt Busch, and Hamlin, were in the top ten for most of the race, although some encountered problems in the closing laps. Stewart was leading the race with two laps remaining but ran out of fuel, giving the lead, and the win, to Bowyer. There were twenty-one lead changes among eight different drivers, as well as eight cautions during the race.
The race was Bowyer's first win in the 2010 season, and the third of his career. The result advanced Bowyer to second in the Drivers' Championship, thirty-five points behind Hamlin and ten ahead of Kevin Harvick, although he fell to twelfth in the standings after receiving a post-race penalty. Chevrolet maintained its lead in the Manufacturers' Championship, thirty-two points ahead of Toyota and seventy-four ahead of Ford, with nine races remaining in the season. Attendance was 95,000, while 3.68 million watched it on television.
New Hampshire Motor Speedway is one of ten intermediate tracks that hold NASCAR races. The standard track at New Hampshire Motor Speedway is a four-turn oval track, 1.058 miles (1.703 km) long. Its banking in the turns varies from two to seven degrees, while the front stretch, the finish line, and the back stretch are all banked at one degree.Before the race, Denny Hamlin led the Drivers' Championship with 5,060 points, followed by Jimmie Johnson with 5,050. Kevin Harvick and Kyle Busch were tied for third place with 5,030 points, and Kyle's older brother Kurt Busch had 5,020 points. Tony Stewart, with 5,010 points, was tied with Greg Biffle, and Jeff Gordon, Carl Edwards, Jeff Burton, Matt Kenseth and Clint Bowyer rounded out the top twelve with 5,000 points each. In the Manufacturers' Championship, Chevrolet was leading with 188 points, twenty-nine points ahead of their rival Toyota. Ford, with 120 points, was fifteen points ahead of Dodge in the battle for third place. Mark Martin was the race's defending champion.A number of drivers competing in the 2010 Chase for the Sprint Cup entered the race optimistic about their chances of winning the championship. Biffle argued that he, Burton, or Stewart were "capable of winning it". Johnson, who already had eighteen previous wins in the Chase, observed that "those 10 races in the Chase is its own world. The people act and react differently under pressure, and for the last four years we have done a great job in that environment." Hamlin commented, "Reliability is the only thing we need to work on. It's taken us out of the last three Chases, not being reliable. You have to have it to be the champion." Ray Evernham also opined on Hamlin, "I think Denny knows that he has the talent to win the championship. I think that he's got focus right now and a good, veteran crew chief in Mike Ford. If Toyota gives him the speed, he could be a threat."
Three practice sessions were held before the Sunday race—one on Friday, and two on Saturday. The first session lasted 90 minutes, and the second 50 minutes. The final session lasted 60 minutes. During the first practice session, Stewart was fastest, placing ahead of Edwards in second and Marcos Ambrose in third. A. J. Allmendinger was scored fourth, and Kyle Busch placed fifth. David Ragan, Johnson, Brad Keselowski, Biffle, and Hamlin rounded out the top ten fastest drivers in the session.
Forty-five drivers attempted to qualify; due to NASCAR's qualifying procedure, only forty-three could race. Keselowski clinched his first pole position in the Sprint Cup Series, with a time of 28.515. He was joined on the front row of the grid by Bowyer. Stewart qualified third, Jamie McMurray took fourth, and Juan Pablo Montoya started fifth. Johnson, one of the drivers in the Chase for the Sprint Cup, qualified twenty-fifth, while Harvick was scored in twenty-seventh. The two drivers who failed to qualify for the race were Jeff Green and Johnny Sauter. Once qualifying concluded Keselowski said, "I felt I got a shot at the pole before I qualified but you never really know. When I ran the lap I knew I gave up a little bit of time right in the middle of both corners but I had a plan going into it and stuck to it and it worked. I’m really proud of that lap."On Saturday morning, Stewart was fastest in the second practice session, ahead of Sam Hornish, Jr. in second, and McMurray in third. Ryan Newman was fourth quickest, and Bowyer took fifth. Kurt Busch, who ended up receiving a penalty for using extra tires, managed sixth. Mark Martin, Johnson, Kasey Kahne, and Montoya followed in the top ten. Of the other drivers in the Chase, Hamlin was scored sixteenth fastest, while Harvick was scored in twenty-fourth. McMurray paced the final practice session, with Jeff Gordon and Johnson following in second and third respectively. Stewart was fourth fastest, ahead of Montoya and Bowyer. Hamlin was scored seventh, Kahne eighth, Dale Earnhardt, Jr. ninth, and David Reutimann tenth. Other Chase drivers included Kyle Busch in twenty-first and Kenseth in thirtieth.
The race, the twenty-seventh of a total of thirty-six in the 2010 season, began at 1:00 p.m. EDT and was televised live in the United States on ESPN. Around the start of the race, weather conditions were partly cloudy with an air temperature around 70 °F (21 °C). Jonathan DeFelice, president of St. Anselm College in Goffstown, New Hampshire, began pre-race ceremonies with the invocation. Anthony Gargiula performed the national anthem, and Mark Corcoran, VP of Industrial and Commercial Sales for Sylvania, gave the command for drivers to start their engines. During the pace laps, two drivers had to move to the rear of the grid due to unapproved changes: David Gilliland because of an engine change, and Andy Lally because of a transmission change.Keselowski retained his pole position lead into the first corner, with Bowyer behind him. One lap later, Stewart passed Keselowski to become the new race leader; Montoya passed Keselowski for the second position on the next lap. By lap eight, Stewart had a lead of over one second. After starting the race in twelfth, Kurt Busch moved up to ninth position by lap nine. Paul Menard, who started in eighth, fell to eleventh position by lap twelve. After losing two positions early, Bowyer moved back up into third position by passing Keselowski. By the nineteenth lap, Johnson had moved up eight positions to seventeenth, and Harvick had moved up seven positions to twentieth.Earnhardt, who began the race in thirty-second, had moved up ten positions to twenty-second by lap 22. Two laps later, Bowyer passed Montoya for second position. Scott Speed spun sideways and collided with the wall four laps later, causing the first caution of the race. On lap 28, Robby Gordon moved into the lead for one lap, delaying his pit stop until lap 29. Once the race resumed, Bowyer regained the lead followed by McMurray in second. McMurray led the next lap, but Bowyer reclaimed the lead on lap 32. Three laps later, Kyle Busch, in seventh place, collided with the wall, but escaped with minor damage. A collision involving Ambrose and Menard occurred on lap 39 and prompted the second caution.Most drivers stayed on the track during the caution, allowing Bowyer to remain the leader on the restart. On lap 48, Michael McDowell drove to the garage because of engine problems. Five laps later, Bowyer led the race, with McMurray 1.3 seconds behind him. Landon Cassill went to the garage due to failing brakes on lap 56. Johnson moved into sixth, as Edwards passed McMurray five laps later for second. By lap 64, Bowyer's lead was over 3.5 seconds.
Four laps later, Johnson passed Keselowski to claim fifth position. On the 81st lap, Earnhardt, Jr. moved into seventh after passing David Reutimann and Stewart. Two laps later, Kurt Busch and Jeff Burton passed Reutimann for ninth and tenth respectively. During lap 90, Earnhardt passed Keselowski for sixth, as Johnson claimed fourth from McMurray. After 93 laps, Bowyer's lead was over five seconds. Two laps later, green flag pit stops began, as Montoya was the first to pit. On lap 98, Edwards became the new leader after Bowyer came into the pits. One lap later, Kurt Busch became the new leader, followed by Jeff Gordon and Robby Gordon. On lap 102, Bowyer reclaimed the lead as the previous leaders made their stops. Bobby Labonte and Casey Mears were unable to continue the race after their pit stops.On lap 113, Burton moved up to sixth, while Jeff Gordon passed Earnhardt for eleventh. Allmendinger fell to twenty-fifth after pit stops due to having run out of fuel on his way onto pit road. Three laps later, both Jeff Gordon and Earnhardt had passed Reutimann for tenth and eleventh respectively. By lap 120, Bowyer had a lead of about four seconds over Edwards. Four laps later, Harvick passed Montoya for fourteenth. On lap 132, Keselowski fell to ninth after being passed by Kurt Busch and Hamlin. On lap 147, Bowyer's lead of over seven seconds was reduced to nothing when the pace car moved on track. During the caution, which was caused by debris, most of the leaders made pit stops.Bowyer maintained his lead on the restart. On lap 153, Kyle Busch moved into tenth position by passing Jeff Gordon. Seven laps later, Burton claimed fourth. On the 162nd lap, Ryan Newman moved up to eleventh, as Keselowski fell to twelfth. Two laps later, Jeff Gordon passed Kyle Busch to move into ninth, while Stewart passed Burton for fourth. On lap 177, Montoya passed Kyle Busch for tenth position. Afterward, Kyle Busch fell to twelfth after being passed by Newman. By lap 192, Bowyer had a 3.5 second lead over McMurray. One lap later, Montoya passed Kurt Busch for ninth. On lap 199, Harvick moved into fifteenth position. Two laps later, Hamlin passed Jeff Burton to claim fifth.
On lap 206, Martin's car suffered a flat tire and the fourth caution was given as a result. Bowyer led on the restart, although he was passed by Stewart within one lap. On lap 213, Hamlin spun sideways, prompting the fifth caution. Despite remaining undamaged, Hamlin fell from fourth to twenty-second position. Stewart led on the restart, as Jeff Gordon claimed second from Bowyer. By lap 221, a sixth caution came out as Kurt Busch, Johnson, and Kyle Busch all spun sideways. After the accident, Johnson fell to twenty-fourth; Stewart maintained his lead on the restart. Five laps later, Matt Kenseth spun out, causing the seventh caution. Stewart led the drivers back to the green flag, but was overtaken by McMurray one lap later.On lap 241, the pace car came out for the eighth and final caution, after Joey Logano collided with the outside wall. McMurray led on the restart, but Stewart reclaimed the lead on lap 247. Seven laps later, Johnson was forced to pit due to a loose wheel. By lap 257, Stewart had a lead of over one second. Five laps later, Hamlin claimed sixth from Harvick. During the 263rd lap, Bowyer passed McMurray for second. Four laps later, Newman passed Kyle Busch for tenth position. After 269 laps, Stewart's lead over Bowyer was 1.6 seconds. Six laps later, Hamlin moved into fifth position after passing Earnhardt. During lap 290, Hamlin passed McMurray for third. With two laps remaining, Stewart and Burton both ran out of fuel, handing the lead back to Bowyer. Bowyer maintained the lead to win his first race of the 2010 season. Hamlin finished second, ahead of McMurray in third, Earnhardt in fourth, and Harvick in fifth.
Bowyer appeared in Victory Lane to celebrate his first win of the season in front of 95,000 people who attended the race. Bowyer also earned $248,250 in race winnings. Stewart took his last-minute loss of the race with good humor, saying, "We went down swinging. I think I ran me out of fuel." In the subsequent post-race press conference, Hamlin said, "First thing I asked is how many cars on the lead lap, because I wanted to see how bad our day was going to be. I set a goal (of) top 15, and then it was top eight and then top six and, 'Holy cow, we can win this thing.' We just made a heck of a charge at the end." Bowyer was delighted with his victory: "[Crew chief] Shane [Wilson] built a brand new race car and we came here and we were fast right off the truck, and everybody had a lot of confidence, a pep in their step. And we showed it from the time we unloaded to qualifying, practice, we were one of the fastest cars here. That’s what it takes to run at this level, to be a part of that Chase, if we can go and continue to have as much fun as we did this weekend. I know it’s the key, I know it is to my success."Johnson was candid about his performance: "We had a decent car and ran in the top five and top 10 but just didn't end up finishing there." Harvick was somewhat more upbeat, saying, "We didn't have a great day. We didn't have a great weekend, honestly, and (fifth) says a lot about this team. If we keep doing that on our bad days, we will be in good shape." The race result left Hamlin leading the Drivers' Championship with 5,230 points. Bowyer, who finished first, moved to second on 5,195, ten points ahead of Harvick and twenty-seven ahead of Kyle Busch. In the Manufacturers' Championship, Chevrolet maintained the lead with 197 points. Toyota remained second with 165 points. Ford followed with 123 points, fourteen points ahead of Dodge in fourth. 3.68 million people watched the race on television. The race took two hours, fifty-eight minutes and twenty-two seconds to complete, and the margin of victory was 0.477 seconds.Although Bowyer's car passed initial inspection, NASCAR announced that they had "discovered issues with the car in a more thorough inspection at its research and development center". Three days after the race, two teams were given penalties: Richard Childress Racing for Bowyer's car, and Whitney Motorsports for McDowell's car. Richard Childress Racing's penalty, for unauthorized alterations to the rear bodywork of Bowyer's car, included a $150,000 fine and a six race suspension for Wilson, and the loss of 150 owner and driver points for Richard Childress and Bowyer respectively. RCR's car chief, Chad Haney, was placed on probation until December 31, 2010, and suspended from NASCAR until November 3, 2010. Whitney Motorsports' penalty was for engine exhaust valves that did not meet NASCAR's weight requirements. The penalties for that included a $50,000 fine and six race suspension for Jeremy Lafaver, while both McDowell and owner Dusty Whitney lost 50 driver and owner points respectively.Childress and Bowyer were both upset with the penalties and almost immediately announced plans to appeal. Bowyer argued the penalties to be too severe, saying, "I don't think the penalty fits the crime. Sixty-thousandths of an inch, folks. Grab a quarter out of your pocket. Less than the thickness of that quarter right there is worth a 150-point fine?" He also argued that his car could have been damaged slightly after the race as his car was pushed by a wrecker after it ran out of gas on its way to victory lane. "Is it possible that a two-ton wrecker could bend the quarter-panel 60-thousandths of an inch? You have to ask yourself that." The team lost the initial appeal, forcing them to make a final appeal to NASCAR National Commissioner John Middlebrook. As a result of the final appeal, Wilson's fine was reduced to $100,000 while he and Haney's suspensions were reduced from six to four races (they were allowed to work with the team during the appeal process); however, the points penalty administered to Bowyer and his team was upheld.Asked if he thought Bowyer could still win the championship after this setback, Stewart argued, "It's possible for sure. The biggest thing is going to be going to the race track and having that stress of not having his crew chief, not having his car chief and those are two key people on a race weekend ... I can promise you that Childress has the resources to cover this ... it's definitely possible, but everyone else is going to have to have trouble." Bowyer did not lose the victory title for the race itself; NASCAR vice president of competition Robin Pemberton commented, "We don't consider taking away the win. If you ask some, they would consider a 150-point penalty with only nine races to go in the Chase a pretty hefty penalty."

The 2010 Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup Final was played on October 5, 2010, at Qwest Field (since renamed CenturyLink Field) in Seattle.  The match determined the winner of the 2010 U.S. Open Cup, a tournament open to amateur and professional soccer teams affiliated with the United States Soccer Federation.  This was the 97th edition of the oldest competition in United States soccer. Seattle Sounders FC won the match, defeating the Columbus Crew 2–1 in front of a sellout crowd of 31,311, the highest attendance at a U.S. Open Cup final. Kevin Burns scored first, giving the Columbus Crew an early lead.  Sanna Nyassi then scored both goals for Seattle Sounders FC as it became the first team since 1983 to win two consecutive U.S. Open Cup championships.
Both the Columbus Crew and Seattle Sounders FC qualified automatically for the third round of the U.S. Open Cup tournament by finishing among the top six in the 2009 Major League Soccer season standings.  Both clubs won three matches in the tournament to advance to the final.  Seattle won the bidding process to host the final.
As a result of its U.S. Open Cup championship, Sounders FC earned a berth in the preliminary round of the 2011–12 CONCACAF Champions League, as well as a $100,000 cash prize. The Crew received the runner-up prize of $50,000.
The U.S. Open Cup is an annual American soccer competition open to all United States Soccer Federation affiliated teams, from amateur adult club teams to the professional clubs of Major League Soccer (MLS).  The 2010 tournament was the 97th edition of the oldest soccer tournament in the United States.In 2010, MLS, which has teams that play in both the United States and Canada, was allowed to enter eight of its U.S.-based teams in the tournament.  The top six MLS teams from the previous season's league table qualified automatically for the tournament, while the remaining two spots are determined by preliminary qualification matches.  The eight MLS entries began play in the third round of the tournament.  In 2009, both Seattle Sounders FC and the Columbus Crew finished among the top six teams in MLS overall league standings and therefore qualified automatically for the third round of the 2010 U.S. Open Cup.
Prior to 2010 the Columbus Crew had been to the U.S. Open Cup final twice, in 1998 and again in 2002, winning the cup in the latter appearance.  On June 29, 2010, the Crew began the competition in the third round, hosting the Rochester Rhinos of the D2 Pro League at Columbus Crew Stadium in Columbus, Ohio in front of a crowd of 1,760.  The Crew's Andy Iro scored in the 30th minute by heading in a corner kick from teammate Eddie Gaven.  In the second half, Rochester evened the score  when substitute Darren Spicer scored from 17 yards out.  The Rhinos' Alfonso Motagalvan was sent off in the 84th minute for a dangerous tackle on Emilio Rentería, forcing Rochester to play the final minutes of the game with 10 men.  The score remained level until the fourth minute of stoppage time, when Steven Lenhart scored with a volley over the onrushing goalkeeper to give Columbus the victory.A week later, on July 6, Columbus faced the Charleston Battery of the USL Second Division in the U.S. Open Cup quarterfinals.  The match was hosted by Columbus, again at Crew Stadium in front of a crowd of 1,847.  In the 37th minute, Lenhart was fouled in the penalty area while going for a cross and the referee signaled for a penalty kick.  Rentería took the penalty kick and drove a right-footed shot into the back of the net, making the score 1–0.  Columbus extended its lead in the 70th minute through a goal from Lenhart, and again in the 87th minute when Gaven scored from a pass from Emmanuel Ekpo.  The Crew won 3–0, earning its first U.S. Open Cup semifinal appearance since 2002.On September 1, 2010, the Columbus Crew visited Washington, D.C. to face MLS club D.C. United in the semifinal match at RFK Stadium in front of a crowd of 3,411. Pablo Hernandez scored in the 17th minute on a penalty kick to give D.C. an early lead which it almost held  for the victory. However, in the 89th minute D.C.'s Marc Burch deflected a shot by Columbus's Iro into the net for an own goal, tying the score and sending the match into extra time.  In the 97th minute, the Crew's Lenhart dribbled the ball into the 18-yard box and was tripped by D.C. United's Carey Talley to draw a penalty.  Guillermo Barros Schelotto took the penalty kick and scored the  winning goal.  The 2–1 final score secured the Crew's spot in the final.
Seattle won the 2009 U.S. Open Cup—the second MLS expansion club to do so in its inaugural season after the Chicago Fire in 1998. Prior to the final, Sounders FC played U.S. Open Cup home games at the Starfire Sports Complex in Tukwila, Washington. The facility is smaller than the club's home stadium for league matches, Qwest Field, but Sounders FC representatives preferred the atmosphere at Starfire for smaller cup matches.On June 30, 2010, Seattle began the defense of its title in a match hosted by the Portland Timbers of the D2 Pro League in Portland, Oregon, at PGE Park in front of a crowd of 15,422.  Sounders FC took the lead in the 13th minute on a header from Nate Jaqua, but the Timbers levelled the score in the 38th minute when Bright Dike scored on a shot from inside the penalty area.  The score was 1–1 at halftime, and remained that way through full-time and extra time.  Seattle finally defeated Portland in a 4–3 penalty shootout with goalkeeper Kasey Keller making two saves and defender Zach Scott scoring the winning penalty kick.Sounders FC hosted its quarterfinal match a week later on July 7 against an MLS club, the Los Angeles Galaxy, at Starfire Sports Complex in front of a sellout crowd of 4,512.  Seattle forward Jaqua again led the attack scoring two goals in the second half.  The first came in the 50th minute when he headed in a rebound off the crossbar and the second came in the 62nd minute off a cross from Miguel Montaño.  Seattle won 2–0.  Sounders FC's reserve goalkeeper Terry Boss also made two saves in his first start for the team.On September 1, 2010, Seattle hosted its semifinal match against another MLS club, Chivas USA.  Like the quarterfinal, it was hosted at Starfire with a sellout crowd of 4,547.  Jaqua gained Seattle an early lead in the 10th minute off a Steve Zakuani cross.  Zakuani was involved again in the 58th minute, this time crossing to a diving Fredy Montero who increased the lead to two.  Chivas USA's Jesús Padilla scored in the 68th minute on a through ball from Justin Braun cutting the deficit to one.  However, in second half stoppage time, Jaqua scored again making the score 3–1 and sealing the Sounders FC victory and an appearance in the tournament final. Jaqua's two goals raised his total to five in the tournament. Zakuani, who had just returned from a pelvic strain injury, had two assists in the match.
On August 26, 2010, U.S. Soccer announced the potential sites for the final, depending on the outcome of the semifinals.  It was determined that if Seattle qualified for the final, they would host it at Qwest Field regardless of the opponent.  If Chivas USA defeated Sounders FC in the semifinals, they would host the Columbus Crew at The Home Depot Center in Carson, California, or visit D.C. United at RFK Stadium in Washington, D.C., depending on the outcome of the other semifinal match.  Since Columbus and Seattle advanced from the semifinals, the final was held at Qwest Field in Seattle.  This was the first U.S. Open Cup final to be played in the state of Washington.Columbus general manager Mark McCullers expressed concerns about the fairness of the scheduling since he claimed it would be difficult for the Crew to travel to the West Coast on October 5 and then return to Chicago three days later for a league match. Crew head coach Robert Warzycha also complained about the scheduling saying, "You make it to a final, but you have to go to Seattle on Sunday after playing a home game on Saturday... You've got to fly all day, play on the (artificial) turf on Tuesday and then you go play an important MLS game in Chicago on Friday. Great."A year after a public argument between Seattle and D.C. United ownership over the fairness of the bidding process to host the 2009 U.S. Open Cup Final—which D.C. United hosted—Sounders FC was successful in its bid to host the 2010 final.  For the 2009 final, D.C. United drew an attendance of 17,329 through extensive marketing efforts.  Seattle began selling tickets to the 2010 final on September 7 and within six days 22,000 had already been sold.
In 2010, prior to meeting in the U.S. Open Cup final, Sounders FC and the Crew met twice in MLS league matches.  The first was played on May 1 at Qwest Field and finished in a 1–1 draw.  
The second meeting between the two teams was played on September 18, only 17 days before the Open Cup final, at Crew Stadium.  Seattle won by a convincing scoreline of 4–0.  Regarding the score of the latter meeting, Sounders FC coach Sigi Schmid stated, "I don't think the difference between the two teams is four goals even though that was the score." Discussing the difficulty of going into Seattle for the final, Crew forward Barros Schelotto commented, "The field is for Seattle. The stadium is for Seattle. Everything is for Seattle. But that does not matter. We have the final. We have 90 minutes to win a trophy. Nothing is more important."In the weeks leading up to the match, Seattle Sounders FC was on a six-game home unbeaten streak. However, in the last match before the final (a league match victory over Toronto FC) goalkeeper Keller allowed a goal, ending his three-game shutout streak.  The Columbus Crew came into the final not having won a league match in the previous month, although their last match was a 0–0 draw with the San Jose Earthquakes on October 2.Since MLS teams began participating in the tournament in 1996, the home team had won nine times and lost three in the U.S. Open Cup final prior to 2011.  The 2003 Chicago Fire, 2007 New England Revolution and 2009 Seattle Sounders FC were the only away teams to win a final.
The 2010 U.S. Open Cup Final was played on October 5 at Qwest Field in Seattle, Washington.  Live television coverage was provided nationally by Fox Soccer Channel.  Prior to kickoff, Seattle's 2009 U.S. Open Cup trophy was displayed at midfield. The final drew an attendance of 31,311 surpassing the 81-year-old record for the event.  The previous record attendance for an Open Cup final was 21,583, set in 1929 when New York Hakoah defeated the Madison Kennel Club of St. Louis.Both clubs started mostly their first-team players for the final.  Costa Rican Leonardo González, a regular starter at left back for Sounders FC, was unavailable due to U.S. Open Cup roster limitations, which allow teams to have only five foreign players on their 18-man, game day roster.  Defender Tyson Wahl started in his place. Crew backup goalkeeper Andy Gruenebaum also started in place of normal starter Will Hesmer, though this was a normal change for U.S. Open Cup and CONCACAF Champions League matches.  Each club was organized in a 4–4–2 formation at kickoff.
Seattle had most of the early scoring opportunities.  Two minutes into the match, Montero took the first shot of the game with a header at close range which was saved by Crew goalkeeper Gruenebaum.  Seconds later, Montero had another shot from distance which went just over the bar.  Four minutes later, Seattle midfielder Zakuani got around Crew defender Frankie Hejduk and passed the ball to Blaise Nkufo whose tap-in attempt was saved by Gruenbaum.  In the 12th minute, Gaven took the Crew's first shot of the match but it flew high over the crossbar.  In the 16th minute Zakuani had a run up the middle before passing to Montero, whose shot was again saved by Gruenbaum.  Columbus successfully defended crosses from Zakuani and Nkufo in the 18th minute and kept Seattle from getting a shot off.  Columbus nearly took the lead in the 20th minute as Emmanuel Ekpo got behind the defense and made a quick pass back to Gaven, who missed a wide-open shot over the bar.While Seattle controlled the game for much of the first half, Columbus took the lead on a counterattack movement in the 24th minute.  The play developed on the right side when Hejduk made a low pass to Lenhart from a forward position.  Lenhart touched the ball to Kevin Burns for a low shot inside the far post for a goal.  Few chances were created after the goal as Columbus' strong defensive play held off Seattle's attacks.  In the 34th minute Tyson Wahl crossed the ball into the box but Gruenbaum was able to jump and grab the ball before Nkufo could direct it towards goal with his head.Seattle equalized in the 38th minute. Montero passed to Tyson Wahl, who crossed the ball into the 18-yard-box, where Crew goalkeeper Gruenebaum hesitated on how to handle the ball. He knocked it away, and it fell to Nathan Sturgis, who passed the ball between the legs of Gaven to find teammate Sanna Nyassi 18 yards out.  Nyassi turned on the ball and shot it past Gruenebaum, who was still out of position.  Following the goal few scoring opportunities were created before halftime.  After one minute of stoppage time, the first half ended with a tie score, 1–1.
Columbus Crew midfielder Kevin Burns commented on the team's attitude after the first half, "We were OK at halftime. Our heads weren't down." No substitutions were made as the teams returned to the field for the second half.Despite Seattle's continued control of the tempo of gameplay early in the second half, they were unable to create many scoring opportunities. In the 58th minute James Riley was alone on the edge of the penalty area after receiving a pass from Montero.  However, Riley's cross was deflected for a corner kick.  Two minutes later Seattle's Zakuani created a scoring threat when he received an aerial pass into the penalty area, but Crew goalkeeper Gruenebaum was quick to get to the play causing Zakuani to fall down and the ball to bounce away before being cleared by Columbus.  In the 64th minute, Kasey Keller made a diving save to stop Gaven's shot from 30 yards out, his fourth shot on goal in the game. Two minutes later, the score line finally changed as Seattle completed 18 consecutive passes.  Montero got open on the right side of the field to receive the 19th and then crossed a ball into the penalty area.  Gruenebaum decided not to chase the pass as Zakuani ran inside of Crew defender Hejduk and headed a shot that hit the crossbar.  The Crew defenders failed to clear the ball before Nyassi ran in and easily scored the go-ahead goal.Zakuani was again on the attack in the 75th minute with a run down the middle, but was "sandwiched" by two Columbus defenders and lost possession.  Columbus made two substitutions in the 78th minute, bringing on fresh legs at forward with Rentería in for Lenhart and swapping midfielder Burns out for forward Andrés Mendoza.  Shortly after the substitutions, Keller came out to grab a Columbus cross and made a long throw to Montero.  Seattle pushed up the field and Montero took a shot which bounced off teammate Nkufo's back.  In the 81st minute, Crew coach Warzycha made his final substitution bringing on Robbie Rogers for Gaven. Shortly after, in the 85th minute, Columbus nearly equalized when Rogers received a pass from Hejduk and took a shot which bounced hard off the crossbar.Seattle made its first substitution in the 79th minute when Sanna Nyassi left the field to an ovation from the crowd as he was replaced by Álvaro Fernández.  In the 87th minute, Zakuani ran free on a breakaway but was taken down by Crew forward Barros Schelotto who received a yellow card for the foul.  Montero took the ensuing free kick and shot it on goal with Gruenebaum catching it for the save.The referee added three minutes of stoppage time to the second half.  During that time, Seattle made its remaining two substitutions.  First in the 90th minute Roger Levesque was brought on for Zakuani, and then in the 93rd minute they brought on Jaqua for Montero.  The referee blew his whistle ending the game shortly thereafter.  Most of the fans in attendance remained after the game for the presentation of the trophy.
I thought there was some good soccer that was played by both teams. We caught a break at the end when they hit the crossbar. You work hard to make your own luck. We showed a lot of character going down 1–0 and coming back. Attitude of our team has been very strong that way. Really proud and what we accomplished tonight is super. It sets us apart and makes us unique and this is the kind of franchise when Adrian [Hanauer], Joe [Roth], Drew [Carey] and Tod Leiweke and the rest of the internal ownership group and everyone else who works at this organization wanted us to be something unique, something special, something different. The fans were fantastic. That's the loudest I've heard this place.  Columbus Crew goalkeeper Andy Gruenbaum commented after the match, "We knew it was going to be a tough place to play, their fan base is great. Anytime you have a championship match on your own pitch, the odds are going to be against you. We knew we had to defend and take advantage of any opportunity. We came out and scored the first goal and they were able to capitalize on two weird bounces."Seattle Sounders FC is the first MLS club to repeat as the U.S. Open Cup champion and the first club overall to repeat since the New York Pancyprian-Freedoms did so in 1982 and 1983.  The victory was also Sigi Schmid's third Open Cup championship as a head coach.  Sanna Nyassi was the first player to score multiple goals in an Open Cup final since Mike Deleray in 1994.  As champions of the tournament, Sounders FC received the $100,000 cash prize while the Columbus Crew received $50,000 as the runner-up.  Seattle also earned a berth into the preliminary round of the 2011–12 CONCACAF Champions League.

The Democratic primary for the 2010 United States Senate election in Pennsylvania took place on May 18, 2010, when Congressman Joe Sestak defeated incumbent Arlen Specter, which led to the end of Specter's five-term Senatorial career. Just prior to the start of the primary campaign, after serving in the Senate as a Republican for 29 years, Specter had switched to the Democratic Party in anticipation of a difficult primary challenge by Pat Toomey; Sestak was ultimately defeated by Toomey in the general election. Political observers and journalists described the race between Specter and Sestak as one of the bitterest and most watched of all the 2010 primary elections.Although Sestak was initially urged to run by the Democratic establishment, Specter gained wide support from Democrats after he switched parties. Major political figures like President Barack Obama and Pennsylvania Governor Ed Rendell later tried to sway Sestak from continuing the race, fearing he would damage Specter's chances in the general election. Former President Bill Clinton offered Sestak a position in the Obama administration if he withdrew his candidacy, an offer Republicans would later criticize. Sestak refused to drop out and criticized Specter's party switch as an opportunistic move aimed solely at self-preservation. Nevertheless, Sestak struggled to overcome problems stemming from low name recognition and Specter's support from such individuals as Joe Biden and Harry Reid, and organizations like the AFL-CIO and Pennsylvania Democratic Committee.
Specter led Sestak by more than 20 percentage points for most of the race, but this lead narrowed significantly in the final month of the campaign, when Sestak concentrated his funds and efforts on television commercials questioning Specter's Democratic credentials. Specter grew more critical of Sestak as the race progressed, attacking his House attendance record, accusing him of failing to pay his staffers minimum wage and alleging he was demoted while serving in the U.S. Navy for creating a poor command climate.  Political observers said Sestak's commercials played a major part in his victory, and that a national swing in momentum toward Republicans and against incumbents ultimately harmed Specter's chances.
Beginning in April 2008, the media reported growing speculation that Chris Matthews, news commentator and host of MSNBC's Hardball with Chris Matthews, might run in the 2010 Democratic primary for the United States Senate Pennsylvania seat then occupied by the Republican Arlen Specter. In an interview with The New York Times Magazine, Matthews said that he believed Specter had been in the Senate for too long, but that running for Senate would mean giving up a career he loved. Mark Leibovich, author of the article, wrote, "Matthews has been particularly obsessed with Pennsylvania of late, devoting hours on and off the air to the state's upcoming Democratic primary, staying in close contact with the state's party apparatus". Speculation was further fueled by Matthews' appearance on an April 14 episode of The Colbert Report. Host Stephen Colbert asked Matthews about the rumors and prodded him to make a public announcement, to which Matthews replied, "Did you ever want to be something your whole life? ... When you grow up, some kids want to be a fireman. I want to be a Senator. But I have to deal with these things as they come." Matthews declined to directly answer questions about his possible candidacy when pressed by the media, but did not deny the possibility.The subject of Matthews' possible candidacy was raised at an October dinner fundraiser for presidential candidate Barack Obama held by Robert Wolf, president of UBS's investment bank. Discussing the dinner later, Matthews told The New York Times, "People have asked me about it. I've never told anyone that I'm running." On November 28, The Patriot-News of Harrisburg reported that Matthews met that week with Pennsylvania Democratic Party Chairman T.J. Rooney and Executive Director Mary Isenhour to discuss possibly running against Specter. Isenhour told the paper Matthews had not formed a campaign committee or begun raising money, and she did not believe he had yet come to a firm decision, adding, "He's got a really good job with MSNBC. I think he's going to put some thought into it before he jumps in." The same day as that Patriot-News report, the political blog FiveThirtyEight.com reported that Matthews had already met with potential campaign staff, something Matthews claimed was "absolutely not true".The increased speculation led some, like former spokesman for Hillary Clinton's 2008 presidential campaign Phil Singer, to criticize Matthews for openly weighing a political campaign bid while working as a news broadcaster. Singer believed Matthews should resign or be suspended from the network until a decision was made. Speculation grew as Matthews spent much of 2008 attending meetings with Pennsylvania representatives and major Democratic fundraisers. Matthews discussed a possible campaign with Pennsylvania Governor Ed Rendell, and poll numbers for a theoretical race showed him only three percentage points behind Specter. However, the speculation came to an end on January 7, 2009, when Matthews told his Hardball staff he was not going to run for Senate. Such media outlets as The New York Times and The Washington Post suggested Matthews' alleged consideration was a tactic to ensure a higher salary during negotiations with MSNBC to renew his contract, which was set to expire in June 2009.
As early as 2008, the five-term Republican Pennsylvania Senator Arlen Specter made clear his plans to seek re-election. Specter had narrowly avoided a primary defeat against conservative challenger Pat Toomey during his 2004 Senate race, and he was expected to face an even greater challenge from Toomey in 2010, particularly since the conservative faction of the Pennsylvania Republican Party had vowed to defeat Specter in the upcoming primary. Some high-profile Democrats, including Vice President Joe Biden and Governor Rendell, began encouraging Specter to join the Democratic Party by publicly offering to help Specter raise money if he switched. A March 2009 Quinnipiac University Polling Institute poll found Specter trailing Toomey 41 percent to 27 percent among Republican primary voters, in large part due to voter angst over Specter's support for the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, which was supported by President Obama. Since the Pennsylvania primaries are closed, the poll noted that Specter could not be assisted by support from moderates or Democrats. Clay F. Richards, assistant director of the Quinnipiac University Polling Institute, said of the poll results, "Pennsylvania Republicans are so unhappy with Sen. Specter’s vote for President Barack Obama's Stimulus Package and so-called pork barrel spending that they are voting for a former Congressman they hardly know."The same month as the March poll, an article in The Hill quoted Specter as stating he was considering leaving the Republican party to run for re-election as an Independent candidate. Specter later denied the validity of those claims, announcing on March 18, "To eliminate any doubt, I am a Republican, and I am running for reelection in 2010 as a Republican on the Republican ticket." However, on April 28, 2009, Specter announced he was leaving the Republican Party and becoming a Democrat because he disagreed with the increasingly conservative direction the Republican Party was heading in and found his personal philosophy was now better aligned with the Democrats. Although Specter said that he primarily based his decision on principle, he also admitted it was partially due to his poor chances at winning the Republican primary: "I have traveled the state and surveyed the sentiments of the Republican Party in Pennsylvania and public opinion polls, observed other public opinion polls and have found that the prospects for winning a Republican primary are bleak."Prior to switching parties, Specter was promised by Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid that he would keep his seniority on the Senate if he joined the Democratic Party. The arrangement displeased some Senate Democrats, and, on May 3, the Senate voted to strip him of his seniority despite Reid's promise. This temporarily made Specter the most junior Democrat in the Senate and severely limited his influence as a legislator. Nevertheless, Specter's decision was praised by many major Democrats, including Reid and President Barack Obama, who promised to campaign for him. Republicans, however, criticized the decision, accusing Specter of betraying his principles and party to preserve his political career. Michael Steele, chairman of the Republican National Committee, said Specter "flipped the bird" to the party and that Specter made the decision based solely because he knew he would lose the election. Senator John Cornyn, chairman of the National Republican Senatorial Committee and a past supporter of Specter, said the decision "represents the height of political self-preservation". Specter defended his position by arguing the Republican Party had strayed too far from the vision of President Ronald Reagan, adding, "I am not prepared to have my 29-year record in the United States Senate decided by the Pennsylvania Republican primary electorate."
Second-term U.S Representative Joe Sestak, a former U.S. Navy admiral, began privately discussing the possibility of seeking the Democratic nomination with his family in December 2008. Senator Bob Menendez, chairman of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, approached Sestak in April 2009 and asked him to run, but Sestak claimed he was not initially interested. Nevertheless, media speculation about Sestak's possible campaign began as early as mid-April 2009, and intensified the day  Specter changed political parties. While most Democrats embraced the long-time Senator, Sestak issued a statement criticizing Specter's decision, declaring it an opportunist move that should have been made in consultation with Pennsylvanians rather than the Senate Democratic leadership and the Washington political establishment. Menendez approached Sestak again, this time asking him not to run against Specter, but Sestak did not agree to back down. Later, when asked by Fox News, Sestak insisted he had not decided whether he would run for the office, but declined to immediately endorse Specter and said he had to "wait and see". During a May 3 appearance on CNN's State of the Union with John King, Sestak questioned whether Specter was really a genuine Democrat, adding, "I think Arlen has to tell us not that it was too hard to run against someone. ... What I need to know is, what is he running for?"
Sestak insisted he would not make a final decision for several months. On May 4, he met with Andy Stern, president of the Service Employees International Union, which fueled speculation that he was seeking labor support for a campaign. Meanwhile, Joe Torsella, the former president of the National Constitution Center, had planned on running for the Democratic nomination and initially announced Specter's party change would not affect his decision to run. However, Torsella announced on May 14 he was dropping out of the race because Specter's decision changed the political landscape, and he wanted to avoid a campaign that "would probably be negative, personal, and more about Senator Specter's past than our common future". It had been reported that Governor Rendell, for whom Torsella previously worked as an aide, pushed for Torsella to step aside so Specter could run unopposed, but Torsella's staff denied those claims. Despite Torsella's departure, Sestak continued to consider entering the race and began gaining support from the Democratic party's more liberal factions like the Progressive Change Campaign Committee, which began a "Draft Sestak" campaign fund. Sestak became further encouraged to run after taking a tour of all 67 Pennsylvania counties to meet with party leaders and discuss such issues as jobs, the economy and health care. Sestak said that the leaders voiced serious concerns to him about the direction of the country and, although his lack of name recognition was a problem, Sestak said many of the people he encountered voiced support for him.On May 27, the website Talking Points Memo posted a handwritten letter by Sestak to candidates declaring his intent to run for Senate. Sestak did not dispute the authenticity of the letter, but told the press he wanted to discuss the matter with his family before making a formal decision. Sestak told media outlets he realized President Obama wished him not to run against Specter, but that he felt the choice should be with the voters of Pennsylvania rather than the president. Governor Rendell overtly tried to convince him not to run, believing it would damage Sestak's own political future, plus cost the Democratic Party both Sestak's House seat and possibly damage Specter's general election chances. Nevertheless, Sestak formally declared his candidacy for the Democratic nomination on August 4, 2009, in a speech before a Veterans of Foreign Wars hall in his native Delaware County. Shortly after the announcement, Toomey issued a statement welcoming Sestak to the race, describing him as "a consistent liberal who really believes in his values", as compared to Specter, who he called "a career political opportunist who believes in nothing but his own re-election".
Arlen Specter, Incumbent U.S. SenatorPennsylvania Rep. William C. Kortz and retired manufacturer Joseph Vodvarka also ran in the Democratic primary, but neither remained for the duration of the race. Kortz, who was little known outside the western Pennsylvania area, dropped out of the race on January 14, 2010 after raising only $20,000 of the $2 million he sought to raise for his campaign. Vodvarka, an Allegheny County man who had been mostly overlooked throughout the race, was formally removed from the ballot in mid-April 2010 after it was revealed he failed to garner the minimum amount of signatures for a nominating petition.
Both candidates started the campaign well-funded. Sestak had more than $3 million available from his House fund to use toward starting a Senate campaign, and raised an additional $1 million by June 30, 2009, which brought his total to about $4.2 million. Sestak called it the largest campaign war-chest of any Senate challenger. Specter, however, was ahead with $6.7 million in campaign funding as of March 31. Sestak also faced challenges arising from his low name recognition and Specter's support among high-profile members of the Democratic establishment, like Obama and Biden. Specter spent the early months of his campaign trying to reestablish and strengthen his Democratic credentials, seeking union support and making speeches highlighting his support of positions supported by the party, such as the economic stimulus package, reforming health care, increasing the minimum wage, protecting abortion rights and supporting stem cell research. In a June 2009 speech to Pennsylvania Democratic Committee members in Pittsburgh, Specter said, "I'm again a Democrat and I'm pleased and proud to be a Democrat." Commentators observed that Sestak's involvement in the race would test Specter's loyalty to the Democratic party and likely force him to make more liberal votes in the Senate.Even before Sestak formally declared his candidacy on August 4, 2009, Specter and Sestak began exchanging criticisms about each other that were so heated, The New York Times writer Janie Lorber suggested "the contest will become one of the more vicious for next year's midterm elections". Sestak repeatedly said Specter was not a "real Democrat" and continued to assert Specter's switch was based on self-preservation rather than principles. Specter called Sestak a "flagrant hypocrite" for questioning Specter's loyalty to the Democratic Party, citing the fact that Sestak himself was registered as an Independent until he became a Democrat in 2006, just before he ran for Congress. Sestak claimed that was because he was serving in the military and wished to be nonpartisan, but Specter called that a "lame excuse for avoiding party affiliation ... undercut by his documented disinterest in the political process", pointing out that records indicated Sestak voted in only 12 out of 35 elections from 1971 to 2005. A day after Sestak formally entered the race, Specter described Sestak's recent 67-county tour as a "taxpayer-financed self-promotion tour around the state". Specter's campaign also accused Sestak of neglecting his duties in the House and missing more than 100 votes in the last year, which Specter called the worst attendance record for any Pennsylvania Congressman. Sestak responded to the latter point that most of the missed votes were procedural in nature, and were missed because of the statewide tour and because he visited his father, who was dying at the time. Sestak accused Specter of launching a "GOP negative style campaign", which Specter denied.
Specter and Sestak participated in an August 14 panel discussion hosted by Netroots Nation, which included questions from online viewers consisting mainly of liberal and progressive bloggers and advocates. Media reports suggested Specter faced tougher questions from the crowd, with many questioning whether they could trust him based on his switching parties. Specter dismissed suggestions that his recent Democratic votes were politically motivated by the primary, and cited his support of the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act and Children's Health Insurance Reauthorization Act as proof of his Democratic credentials. Sestak argued a change in leadership was necessary and that his military background as a United States Navy admiral gave him the necessary experience. Sestak also pointed out that Specter worked with former Senator Bob Dole to defeat President Bill Clinton's health care plan in 1993. When some in the crowd brought up how Senator Chuck Grassley, a past ally of Specter's, was arguing that Obama's health care plan would lead to "death panels", Specter said that Grassley was wrong and that he would call him about the matter. When some in the crowd chanted, "Call him now!", Specter took several audience members backstage and left a phone message for Grassley as they watched. Salon.com said based on the stunt, "Specter may have won the day, if not the battle". However, a straw poll of 250 online activists attending the event showed Sestak was preferred to Specter by a vote of 46 percent to 10 percent.
Later, following an e-mail exchange with the expected Republican challenger Toomey about health care, Sestak proposed an unorthodox joint town hall with Toomey about the issue, which was held September 2 at Muhlenberg College in Allentown. Specter was not invited to participate, and political pollster G. Terry Madonna of Franklin & Marshall College described it as an "informal pact" between Sestak and Toomey to weaken their joint rival, something the two men denied. Commentators suggested Toomey was willing to help Sestak at this stage of the race because he preferred Sestak as a general election opponent over Specter, who could possibly draw Republican and Independent voters from Toomey. Also in September, Obama appeared in a 30-second television ad for Specter, praising him for his support of the President's economic recovery initiatives. A September poll by Franklin & Marshall College found Specter maintained a 37 percent to 11 percent lead over Sestak, but also that 54 percent of people felt a change was needed as opposed to 34 percent who felt Specter deserved a sixth term. That poll also found 73 percent felt they did not know enough about Sestak to form an opinion, which pollster Madonna said indicated the race would be focused more on Specter's incumbency and record than about Sestak or Toomey.
On September 15, Obama attended a Philadelphia fundraising dinner for Specter, an unusually public declaration of support so early in the primary season, when the President has the option of remaining neutral until the final outcome becomes clearer. Governor Rendell said that Obama and Biden felt obligated to strongly support Specter because they so strongly lobbied him to switch parties. Philadelphia Mayor Michael Nutter and radio personality Michael Smerconish also spoke on Specter's behalf. Senate Majority Leader Reid took the unusual steps of scheduling no Senate votes that day so both Specter and Pennsylvania Senator Bob Casey, Jr. could attend the fundraiser. That move drew criticism from Republicans, as well as from Sestak, who felt Specter was skirting his Senate responsibilities, yet hypocritically criticizing Sestak at the same time for missing more than 100 votes in the U.S. House. The event was expected to raise about $2.5 million, which was to be split between Specter's campaign and the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee. After the fundraiser, Obama and Specter traveled via Air Force One to Pittsburgh to address labor activists at the AFL-CIO convention. There, Specter assured the audience he would support the Employee Free Choice Act, a proposed bill that would make union formation easier, which Specter had previously opposed as a Republican.
As the primary entered into October, Specter continued to criticize Sestak on his record of missed votes in Congress. He claimed Sestak missed 122 in the past year, or nearly 17 percent of his total votes, whereas Specter missed four. In a letter, Specter told Sestak he should drop out of the campaign and start voting on a more consistent basis, or resign from the House "so he can cease to be a burden to the taxpayers". Around the same time, Sestak launched a website called "The Real Specter", which highlighted the right-leaning votes Specter made and alliances he held during his 29 years as a Republican in the senate. Specter continued to maintain a significant lead against Sestak of 19 percentage points, according to a Quinnipiac University poll released that month. But Sestak pointed out that the gap was 32 points in July, and cited the poll as proof that he was gaining ground in the race. Also that month, new reports indicated Toomey was growing in popularity and, in one poll, was actually ahead of Specter, with 43 percent of respondents saying they would vote for him compared to 42 percent for Specter. This was attributed by some to the challenge presented by Sestak and the declining popularity of Obama, whose approval rating had dropped from 56 percent in July to 49 percent in October.On October 14, Specter reported he had raised $1.8 million during the previous three-month period, bringing his total to about $8.7 million. The Senator said that he was aided in large part by his September 15 fundraiser hosted by Obama. In that same period, Sestak raised only $758,000, about a quarter million dollars lower than the previous quarter, making his total allocation about $4.7 million. Sestak continued working hard to overcome his name recognition problem, seldom turning down interview requests and asking his staff to work six 12-hour days a week. As a result, Sestak saw a large amount of turnover in his staff, going through nearly half a dozen press secretaries and several chiefs of staff. Sestak called on Specter participate in six debates, one for each media market in Pennsylvania, but Specter only agreed to participate in one because that was the amount of debates he participated in as a Republican. On December 7, Sestak was endorsed by Congressman Barney Frank, who said that he was impressed by Sestak's leadership on economic and military issues, as well as his positions against the military's "don't ask, don't tell" policy and the Defense of Marriage Act. The endorsement was important to Sestak because it was the first time a prominent member of Congress broke with the Democratic establishment to back him over Specter. Frank also said of Specter's switching parties, "I have to say I don't think it did our profession any good for someone to announce that he switched parties purely so he could survive."New polls in January indicated voter support was growing for Toomey, who now held a projected nine percentage point lead over Specter and an eight-point lead over Sestak. Specter continued to lead against Sestak in the Democratic primary poll, this time by a 21-point margin. Some political scientists believed Toomey's gain over Specter could be attributed to voter distrust of establishment candidates and growing dissatisfaction with the health care proposal pending in Congress. However, some Democratic leaders felt Sestak's challenge to Specter was having a detrimental effect not only to Specter, but to the Democratic party in general and their prospects for ultimately winning the general election. This feeling was enhanced by the growing national support for the Republican party, and especially by the unexpected victory of the Tea Party-backed Republican Scott Brown in a special election for a traditionally Democratic Massachusetts Senate seat. Specter acknowledged to The New York Times that the national political mood might work against him in the primary, but insisted he was not discouraged and expressed confidence in his ability to survive.
The primary continued to grow more heated in February 2010. On February 5, the two candidates held their first face-to-face debate, and used the 30-minute forum to strongly criticize each other, with Sestak continuing to associate Specter with failed Republican policies and Specter arguing his opponent was more focused on criticizing him than debating policy. Sestak continued to attack Specter for switching parties, asking, "Is the best the Democrats can do someone who has been on the other side, with respect, for 50 years, and cast 2,000 votes with President Bush?" Likewise, Specter once again criticized Sestak's missed votes in Congress, which he said would have been enough to earn Sestak a court-martial for going AWOL in his former Naval career. Sestak also criticized Specter for voting in favor of the Iraq War, and Specter in turn condemned Sestak for supporting Obama's proposed troop increase for the War in Afghanistan, which Specter opposed. The next day, the Pennsylvania Democratic Committee voted to endorse Specter over Sestak, with 77 percent of voters supporting the incumbent Senator, or 229 votes compared to Sestak's 72. Sestak criticized the committee for its decision, but also argued it solidified his own position as a political outsider independent from the mainstream Washington establishment. Media outlets said the vote indicated Specter had convinced most important figures in the state party that he was not simply a crossover politician.Later in February, Specter accused Sestak of mistreating his employees and disobeying state and federal minimum wage laws by severely underpaying his House staff. Citing Federal Election Commission reports, Specter claimed ten of Sestak's sixteen campaign staffers were making less than minimum wage and that they were so underpaid they were eligible for food stamps. He also noted that Sestak's three highest-paid staffers were members of his family, including his brother Richard Sestak, who worked as campaign manager. T.J. Rooney, a Specter supporter, wrote a letter to Sestak expressing concern about the potential violation of minimum wage laws, which read: "It is inconceivable to me that our standard bearer wouldn’t be paying his workers the minimum wage". Sestak responded by acknowledging his staff could make more money elsewhere, but said "they choose to work hard and make some sacrifices because they know how important it is to elect someone to the United States Senate who shares their principles".
As the primary race entered into March, Specter appeared to be maintaining his momentum, with polls indicating he not only led Sestak by 24 percentage points, but had recaptured a projected lead against Toomey in the general election by a margin of 49 to 42 percent. Pollsters indicated Specter was still benefiting greatly from his strong name recognition, whereas Sestak and Toomey remained relatively little-known. Peter Brown, assistant director of the Quinnipiac University Polling Institute, said, "There remains no evidence that his primary challenger, Congressman Joe Sestak, has made much progress as we get within three months of the May primary." However, Time writer Karen Tumulty noted that while "thus far, Sestak has failed to meet expectations", the poll also indicated some weaknesses for Specter. Namely, more than half of the surveyed Pennsylvanians did not feel he deserved another term, and among Democrats who knew the candidates well enough to form an opinion of both, Sestak led Specter 54 percent to 37 percent. On March 16, Governor Rendell restated his past support of Specter and said of Sestak, "He has, in my mind, no chance to win."
On March 30, Specter won the backing of the AFL-CIO, which was considered one of the most important endorsements in the primary race. It was one of several major labor endorsements Specter had received, including the state Service Employees International Union and the Pennsylvania State Education Association, which represented 200,000 state teachers. Representatives from the AFL-CIO cited Specter's backing of President Obama's stimulus package as a major factor in their decision. Sestak criticized the union federation's decision, pointing out he had a 100 percent rating from the national AFL-CIO while Specter had a 61 percent rating. He also attacked Specter for previously backing President George W. Bush's economic policies and said, "Pennsylvania workers need a Senator they can count on to be there when they need him, not only when he needs them during an election."  The Philadelphia Inquirer writer Thomas Fitzgerald called the endorsement "a powerful affirmation of how smoothly Specter has managed his political transition to the Democratic Party since leaving the Republican Party less than a year ago".On April 11, Sestak held a debate with Toomey in Philadelphia without Specter present, which media observers described as an explicit criticism of Specter for refusing to hold more than one debate with Sestak. During that debate, Sestak strongly attacked Toomey's voting record in what The Morning Call reporter Colby Itkowitz described as "an obvious effort to show Democrats that he could hold his own in a general election matchup". At the end of the debate, Toomey voiced respect for Sestak and described him as a more principled man than Specter, who he criticized for not participating in more debates. Later that month, when the Senate candidates publicly released their quarterly campaign finance reports on April 15, it was revealed Toomey raised more in the first three months of 2010 than either Democratic candidate, adding $2.3 million to his total $4.1 million war chest compared to Specter adding $1.1 million to his total $9.1 million fund. Political analysts attributed this to the national swing in momentum toward Republicans, and said that it could indicate the Republicans would be victorious in many Senate races, including in Pennsylvania. Sestak raised $442,000 in the three-month period, down from his previous quarter, which Specter's campaign said proved Democratic donors had rejected his candidacy. Specter's fundraising advantage was significant because it allowed him to start early in running political campaign commercials.
Starting in April, both Specter and Sestak launched television advertisements that were particularly critical of each other. Sestak, who had been saving most of his roughly $5 million campaign funds until the final month of the primary race, unveiled a 60-second spot that highlighted his Navy career and described the role his daughter's experience as a brain cancer survivor played in his decision to enter politics. The commercial did not discuss Specter by name but made several implicit references to him, such as Sestak's statements that "too many politicians are concerned about keeping their jobs instead of helping people" and "if we want real change in Washington, we can't keep sending the same career politicians to represent us". Specter launched several commercials, most focusing on his plans to promote job growth. One advertisement, however, focused entirely on attacking Sestak, highlighting not only his voting attendance record – labeling him "No Show Joe" – but also his Navy service. The commercial stated Sestak was "relieved of duty in the Navy for creating a poor command climate", a reference to Sestak's 2005 transfer from a senior Pentagon planning post to a lesser position, which effectively ended his naval career.The Navy Times had previously reported the transfer resulted from Sestak forcing subordinates to work unreasonable hours, although Sestak himself disputed that accusation and attributed the transfer to the fact that the new top officer, Admiral Michael Mullen, simply wanted to appoint his own team. Sestak called on Specter to stop broadcasting the commercial, accusing the Senator of "Republican-style" negative campaign tactics, which he compared to those used against Senator John Kerry by the Swift Vets and POWs for Truth during the 2004 presidential election. Sestak said in a statement, "It's time to tell Arlen Specter: Democrats don't 'swift boat'. We're better than that." A group of veterans gathered in Philadelphia to echo Sestak's call that the commercial should be removed, with retired U.S. Air Force Lieutenant General Robert E. Kelley announcing, "We're all here because we're enraged at the fact that someone, anyone, in the United States today would question someone who has 30 years of service." Specter's campaign replied they would not remove the commercial because it was accurate, and instead called on Sestak to remove his own advertisement, claiming it violated United States Department of Defense guidelines because it used military images, references and jargon without a disclaimer that it was not endorsed by the department.
Sestak and Specter held their first and only televised debate on May 1 at Philadelphia's Fox affiliate, during which the two candidates bitterly attacked each other's character and honesty. The two began arguing even before the hour-long debate formally began, when Sestak objected to Specter's use of notes and said that the rules did not allow them. The debate organizer ruled the notes were allowed. Specter criticized Sestak for campaign advertisements that accused the Senator of lying about Sestak's record. Specter said, "Nobody has ever called me a liar," and demanded an apology, to which Sestak did not respond. Specter also repeatedly asked Sestak to publicly release his military records, to which Sestak again refused to respond. Sestak accused Specter of using Republican-style tactics in the vein of Karl Rove, former adviser to George W. Bush, and said Specter's attacks were meant to mask his record of supporting Bush's failed economic policies. Specter insisted the questions raised about Sestak's naval record were legitimate because much of Sestak's campaign was based on his military background, adding, "It goes to his ability to get things done, to get along with people. He's all peaches and cream on television." Specter criticized Sestak for supporting the troop build-up in Afghanistan, while Sestak noted that Specter voted against a ban on assault weapons in the 1990s. The Philadelphia Inquirer noted the debate was "every bit as contentious as their Democratic Senate primary struggle has become in its closing days".
With only two weeks remaining before the primary, a Quinnipiac University poll released May 4 showed Specter's lead against Sestak had significantly narrowed, dropping from 53-32 percent in the previous month to 47-39 percent. A daily tracking poll by Muhlenberg College showed the race as even closer, with Specter supported by 46 percent of likely voters surveyed, and Sestak trailing only four points at 42 percent. The Quinnipiac poll indicated the strongest factor in these changes was that Sestak was gaining better name recognition due to his television commercials. According to the poll, 43 percent of respondents now had a favorable view of him, compared to only 33 percent in March. The day after the poll was released, Sestak unveiled a new television advertisement strongly critical of Specter, highlighting the incumbent Senator's Republican history and showing images of him with George W. Bush and Republican vice presidential candidate Sarah Palin. The commercial featured a clip of Specter saying, "My change in party will enable me to be reelected" and ended with a narrator saying, "Arlen Specter switched parties to save one job: his, not yours." The same week the advertisement ran, T.J. Rooney said in an interview with Politico that a Sestak primary victory would be "cataclysmic" for the party in the general election, and warned Democratic voters, "If we want to keep this seat in Democratic hands, the only person capable of delivering that victory is Arlen Specter."Specter received several high-profile endorsements during the final weeks leading up to the primary. Senator John Kerry, who had been an early supporter of Sestak's 2006 House campaign, endorsed Specter in the Senate race, calling him "fighter and a friend, and I am proud to vouch for his character". The Philadelphia Inquirer called Sestak "a worthy opponent" and said that his determination made the race especially competitive, but ultimately embraced Specter, whose overall career record the newspaper said was "a good choice for Democrats". The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette also endorsed Specter, focusing more on the fact that Specter stood the best chance of defeating Toomey in a general election challenge. The Pittsburgh Tribune-Review, however, endorsed Sestak, calling him "incredibly intelligent, thoughtful and articular" while condemning Specter as a "self-serving political ferret" for switching parties. Actor Michael J. Fox, who suffers from Parkinson's disease, appeared in a television advertisement for Specter, praising the Senator for his long-standing support of stem cell research. Fox said, "In the fight against disease, you can look back or move forward. Arlen Specter is moving forward." President Obama sent e-mail messages to his Organizing for America supporters encouraging them to vote for Specter, However, despite his long position of support for Specter, Obama did not fly to Pennsylvania to actively campaign for the Senator during the campaign's final days.As the campaign entered its final week, polls showed Specter and Sestak at a dead heat, with different surveys reporting contradictory findings over which candidate maintained a slight edge. A Quinnipiac University poll found Specter leading 44-42 percent, with fourteen percent undecided, whereas a Franklin & Marshall poll found Sestak ahead 38-36 percent, with about a quarter of voters undecided. In both cases, the lead fell within the survey's margin of error. G. Terry Madonna, director of the Franklin & Marshall poll, said that Sestak improved because his television commercials were resonating with voters on three fronts: the arguments that Specter switched parties for solely political reasons, that he consistently voted for Republican policies and that he had been in office too long.
Sestak won the May 18 primary with 53.8 percent of the vote, or 568,563 of the votes cast, compared to 46.2 percent and 487,217 votes for Specter. The defeat led to the end of Specter's nearly 30-year Senate career, the longest of any Pennsylvania Senator in history. Afterward, Sestak declared, "This is what democracy should look like: a win for the people over the establishment. It should come as no surprise to anyone that people want a change." Specter conceded defeat and said, "It's been a great privilege to serve the people of Pennsylvania. It's been a great privilege to be in the United States Senate." Commentators suggested Specter's defeat signaled an electorate unsatisfied with the establishment in both major parties, and indicated that the backing of prominent politicians had little effect on voters during this political age. Sestak's victory was seen as a minor embarrassment for Obama, who strongly and publicly advocated for Specter during the race. Several news outlets reflected that Sestak's television advertisements condemning Specter as a hypocrite and opportunist were especially effective and may have been the primary factor in his victory. The Washington Post said the Pennsylvania race drew more attention than any other primary election in 2010 due to Specter's longevity and his switch to the Democratic party.Toomey went on to defeat Sestak in the general election, winning by a margin of 51 to 49 percent.
During a February 2010 television interview, Sestak said that in July 2009 he was offered a job in President Obama's administration if he dropped out of the race. During a February 18 taping of Larry Kane: Voice of Reason, a Philadelphia-area local news show, host Larry Kane asked Sestak whether such an offer had been made, to which Sestak responded, "Yes", without elaborating beyond that it was a high-ranking assignment and that he did not plan to take it. In subsequent press inquiries, Sestak repeatedly stood by his original statement. When asked about the matter by The Washington Post, he said, "There has been some indirect means in which they were trying to offer things if I got out." Likewise, during an appearance on the Fox News Channel, he said, "I was asked a direct question yesterday and I answered it honestly. There's nothing more to go into. I'm in this race now." Over the next month, White House officials did not answer multiple press inquiries about whether Sestak's claims were true. On March 16, White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs said he had reviewed the matter and found conversations that had been held with Sestak were "not problematic."In March, Congressman Darrell Issa, the ranking Republican on the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, sent a letter to White House Counsel Robert Bauer stating if Sestak's claim was true, the Obama administration may have violated a federal statue that makes it illegal for a government employee to use his authority to interfere with a Senate election. Interest in the alleged job offer reignited after Sestak defeated Specter in the primary on May 18. Seven Republicans from the Senate Judiciary Committee wrote to Attorney General Eric Holder seeking a review of the legal implications of the offer. Around this time, Sestak continued to maintain that a job offer was made, but he downplayed the importance of the incident and defended Obama's integrity. On May 28, the White House formally responded to the allegations and acknowledged White House Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel enlisted former President Bill Clinton to offer Sestak a seat on a presidential advisory board or another executive board if Sestak dropped his candidacy. If Sestak accepted, he would have been allowed to remain in the House while serving in the unpaid position.Bauer said that nobody in the administration itself directly discussed the offer with Sestak, and he does not believe there was anything improper, illegal or unethical about the conduct. Republicans in Congress disagreed, arguing the action contradicted claims Obama made during his presidential campaign about ethical conduct and transparency in government. Darrell Issa, in particular, felt it was an impeachable offense and referred to it as "Obama's Watergate". Nevertheless, the matter gradually became less of a focus during the primary election, where other topics like spending and the economy took the spotlight. With Issa poised to become chairman of the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform following the Republican Party recapturing the house during the 2010 midterm elections, it was widely expected he would launch an official investigation into the job offer based on his prior critical comments about the matter. However, on November 5, Issa announced he would not pursue an investigation. Some politicians and members of the media said that the job offer made to Sestak was neither illegal nor abhorrent, and that such deals are regularly made by politicians of all levels. Chris Cillizza of The Washington Post felt the matter only appeared to be a scandal because the White House badly mishandled the response, and Chicago Tribune writer John Kass wrote, "Offering a spot to an ambitious young politician to protect an old servile weakling isn't new. Presidents do it, governors do it. Big-city mayors really know how to do it."

The 2011 Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup Final was a soccer match between the Seattle Sounders FC and the Chicago Fire, played on October 4, 2011, at CenturyLink Field in Seattle, Washington. The match was the culmination of the 2011 U.S. Open Cup, a tournament open to amateur and professional soccer teams affiliated with the United States Soccer Federation (U.S. Soccer). This was the 98th edition of the U.S. Open Cup, the oldest ongoing competition in American soccer. The Seattle Sounders FC won by defeating the Chicago Fire 2–0 with goals scored by Fredy Montero and Osvaldo Alonso. The attendance was 36,615, breaking the record for the final set the previous year when Seattle also won and hosted. Seattle became the first team since 1968 to win three consecutive U.S. Open Cup championships and the fourth team ever to do so in the 98-year history of the tournament.
Sounders FC automatically qualified for the third round of the U.S. Open Cup tournament by finishing among the top six in the 2010 Major League Soccer season. The Fire did not automatically qualify, and had to play through two qualification rounds before entering the official tournament. Prior to the final, Chicago and Seattle had met twice in 2011, with Seattle winning one game and the other ending in a draw.
The final was televised live on Fox Soccer. This was the second consecutive year the tournament final was played at CenturyLink Field.  As the winner of the tournament, Seattle earned a berth in the 2012–13 CONCACAF Champions League and received a $100,000 cash prize. Chicago received a $50,000 prize as the runner-up. Following the final, criticism was raised regarding Seattle winning hosting rights for each round they played. In response, U.S. Soccer announced changes to the rules for determining the host of tournament matches.
The U.S. Open Cup is an annual American soccer competition open to all U.S. Soccer affiliated teams, from amateur adult club teams to the professional clubs of Major League Soccer (MLS). The 2011 tournament was the 98th edition of the oldest soccer tournament in the United States.The MLS, which has teams that play in both the United States and Canada, was allowed to enter eight of its fifteen U.S.-based teams in the tournament. The top six MLS teams from the previous season's league standings qualified automatically for the tournament, while the remaining two spots were determined by preliminary qualification matches. The eight MLS entries began play in the third round of the tournament. In 2010, Seattle Sounders FC finished among the top six in the MLS overall league standings to qualify for the third round of the 2011 U.S. Open Cup. The Chicago Fire however, did not and therefore had to play a series of qualification matches against fellow MLS teams that finished outside of the top six to qualify for the Open Cup tournament.
Prior to reaching the 2011 final, the Chicago Fire had reached the U.S. Open Cup final five times in their 14-year history, the most of any MLS franchise, winning four out of five of the tournaments–most recently in 2006. The Fire began their 2011 Open Cup campaign on March 30, 2011, in the MLS qualification semifinals, hosting the Colorado Rapids at Shea Stadium in Peoria, Illinois. Chicago scored first with a goal from Gastón Puerari right before half time. Just one minute into the second half, the Rapids equalized with a goal from Andre Akpan. Following Akpan's goal, the match remained tied for 15 minutes until Chicago's Jalil Anibaba scored the match-winning goal in the 61st minute of play.  Chicago moved on to the next round of qualification with a final score of 2–1.The Fire then turned their attention to their second and final qualification match hosted by the San Jose Earthquakes at Buck Shaw Stadium in Santa Clara, California. Played on May 24, 2011, in front of 4,124 spectators, the hosts took a two-goal lead in the first half with Ellis McLoughlin and Justin Morrow scoring in the 14th and 43rd minutes, respectively. The Fire halved the deficit in the 61st minute with a goal from Orr Barouch. Fifteen minutes later the Fire tied the score with a strike from Yamith Cuesta. The score remained tied until the end of regulation, leading to extra time, during which Chicago's Gonzalo Segares was ejected for dissent. Despite the Earthquakes' man advantage, the two sides remained tied during overtime, prompting a penalty shootout. In the fifth round of penalties, with Chicago leading 5–4, San Jose's Scott Sealy missed his shot as it deflected off the crossbar, giving the Fire a second qualifier victory and a berth into the third round of the 2011 U.S. Open Cup tournament.In the third round, Chicago faced the Rochester Rhinos of the USL Pro division. Rochester hosted the match on June 28 at the Rhinos' Sahlen's Stadium in front of a crowd of 5,558. The Fire's Diego Cháves netted the match's only goal in the 37th minute of play, earning the Fire a spot in the quarterfinals for the first time since 2008.In the quarterfinals, held on July 12, 2011, the Fire hosted MLS Eastern Conference rival the New York Red Bulls at Toyota Park in Bridgeview, Illinois.  Against mostly reserves for New York, the Fire won the match 4–0 with two goals from Orr Barouch and a goal each scored by Dominic Oduro and Yamith Cuesta.  Due to power outages in the area following a severe thunderstorm, the game's start time was moved up from 7:30 pm to 5:00 pm local time, resulting in a late-arriving attendance of about 2,000.  Following the match, uproar from Red Bull fans prompted coach Hans Backe to explain that fatigue was the reason for sending only his team's reserve players and an assistant coach to Chicago. New York had lost to DC United in league play just 2 days earlier.On August 31, 2011, the Fire played host to another USL Pro side, the Richmond Kickers, in the semifinal round. On their way to the semifinals, the Kickers defeated two MLS teams in consecutive rounds. They upset the Columbus Crew and Sporting Kansas City in the third round and the quarterfinals, respectively. The semifinal was hosted by the Fire at Toyota Park in front of a crowd of 8,909.  In the 32nd minute, the Fire took the lead with a goal from Sebastián Grazzini. In the 61st minute, Chicago went up 2–0 with a goal from Dominic Oduro. Seven minutes later, the Kickers cut the lead in half with a goal from Yomby William. The Fire won 2–1, earning their sixth trip to the U.S. Open Cup final.
In 2009, Seattle Sounders FC became the second MLS expansion club to win the U.S. Open Cup tournament, after the Chicago Fire in 1998. They defended their title in 2010 to win a second straight championship.  Prior to the final, Sounders FC played U.S. Open Cup home games at the Starfire Sports Complex in Tukwila, Washington. The facility is smaller than the club's home stadium for league matches, CenturyLink Field, but Sounders FC representatives preferred the atmosphere at Starfire for smaller cup matches.Sounders FC began the defense of their title on June 28, 2011, when they hosted the Kitsap Pumas of the USL Premier Development League from Bremerton, Washington.  The match was played at Starfire in front of 3,811 fans.  Seattle took the lead in the 39th minute when Michael Fucito scored off a headed pass from Nate Jaqua.  Early in the second half Fucito doubled the lead by taking a pass from Mike Seamon and shooting past several defenders for the goal.  Kitsap attempted their comeback in the 71st minute when Nikolas Besagno scored from a crossing pass from Robert Christner.  In the 83rd minute, Kitsap forward Warlen Silva nearly equalized on a breakaway run, but his shot went into the side netting.  Seattle was able to hold on for the 2–1 victory.
Seattle then hosted their quarterfinal match on July 13 against a fellow MLS side, the Los Angeles Galaxy.  The match was again held at Starfire, with an attendance of 4,322.  Nate Jaqua scored following a pass from Pat Noonan in the 4th minute.  In the 25th minute, Fredy Montero scored with a left-footed shot from an assist from Jaqua giving Seattle a 2–0 lead.  The Galaxy gained a goal back in the 40th minute when Adam Cristman scored on a cross from Chris Birchall.  In the 74th minute, Seattle midfielder Lamar Neagle scored from a cross by Álvaro Fernández, extending Seattle's lead to 2 goals.On August 30, 2011, Sounders FC hosted their semifinal opponent, FC Dallas, in front of 4,593 at Starfire Sports Complex.  Both teams started their first team players for the match.  Seattle applied offensive pressure for most of the first half and broke through with a goal in the 40th minute.  Fredy Montero, who had just missed with a bicycle kick shot moments earlier, took a curling left-footed shot in front of goal for the score.  Dallas nearly equalized in the 49th minute when Marvin Chavez had a shot bounce hard off the goal post.  Dallas continued to attack for most of the second half, and Chavez again had a chance to equalize just before the final whistle, but his shot went high over the goal.  With a final score of 1–0, Seattle secured their third straight appearance in the U.S. Open Cup final match.  Following the match, Dallas coach Schellas Hyndman complained about how hosts are determined for U.S. Open Cup matches saying, "for me, this is one of the best events – the Lamar Hunt Open Cup – but I'd really like to see it into a structure where it's not a bid system. A bid system is where one team will buy the games because they're bidding higher."  He continued, "it could go to the higher seeds, instead of a bid system where you're spending money, or it could be pre-determined. I think that brings out all the fairness to the event."
On August 26, 2011, U.S. Soccer announced the potential sites for the final, depending on the outcome of the semifinals.  It was determined through a blind bid process that if Seattle qualified for the final, they would host it at CenturyLink Field regardless of the opponent, for the second straight year.  If FC Dallas defeated Sounders FC in the semifinals, they would host the Richmond Kickers at Pizza Hut Park in Frisco, Texas, or visit the Chicago Fire at Toyota Park in Bridgeview, Illinois, depending on the outcome of the other semifinal match. Seattle defeated Dallas and Chicago defeated Richmond in the semifinals, which resulted in Sounders FC hosting the Fire in the 2011 Open Cup final at CenturyLink Field.  Seattle had hosted the previous final, in 2010, drawing a crowd of 31,311 and breaking the 81-year-old attendance record for the event set in 1929 when New York Hakoah defeated the Madison Kennel Club of St. Louis.Tickets for the 2011 final went on sale to the public on September 6.  By September 19, it was announced that 27,000 tickets had already been sold. Nine days later, ticket sales surpassed 30,000 and it was announced that the "Hawks Nest" bleacher seats in the north end of CenturyLink Field would be made available for the event. In the week leading up to the final, Sounders FC owner and general manager Adrian Hanauer indicated that sections of the stadium would continue to be opened to meet demand.  He stated that "no paying customer would be turned away."
With a better MLS regular season record and home field advantage, Sounders FC were the favorites to win the match; however, the Fire had improved throughout the year through better play from their wingers and midfielders.Seattle and Chicago had met twice in MLS regular season matches in 2011.  The first meeting, on April 9, 2011, resulted in a 2–1 win for Sounders FC in front of their home crowd.  It was Seattle's 5th game of the season. The second meeting was hosted by Chicago on June 4, 2011, and resulted in a 0–0 draw.  It was the first game for Chicago coach Frank Klopas as he replaced Carlos de los Cobos, who was fired by the club the previous week. As a player, Klopas had scored the winning goal for Chicago in the 1998 U.S. Open Cup final.  As coach, ESPNChicago.com analyst Charlie Corr credited him with the team's successful shift in tactics since previously meeting Seattle.In the days leading up to the final, Seattle had recently finished a long road trip.  Chicago's schedule made the match their third in a week's time. In preparation for the final, the managers fielded weaker sides during their respective league matches two days before the game, allowing them to rest several regular starters.  The Sounders were playing well, having already clinched a MLS playoff berth. A victory over the New England Revolution on the weekend prior to the final gave the team a three-game winning streak. The Fire had defeated Real Salt Lake on September 28, but their playoff chances were diminished after a tie against the Houston Dynamo on the weekend prior to the final.
The match was televised live on Fox Soccer with coverage starting at 7 pm PT (02:00 UTC). The attendance of 36,615 was a record crowd for the competition's final. Seattle's Emerald City Supporters unveiled tifo before kickoff depicting the Grim Reaper over the graves of D.C. United, the Columbus Crew, and the Chicago Fire.Injuries to key players were a concern for both teams in the buildup to the final.  For Seattle, midfielder Mauro Rosales's knee was injured and he did not recover in time for the final. Also, Sounders FC defender James Riley was recovering from a concussion. He practiced in the week prior to the final and started in the match.  For Chicago, midfielder Sebastian Grazzini was a key player who was questionable before the match. Grazzini began the game on the bench for Chicago.
The match started with a frenetic pace as both teams earned free kick attempts within the opening two minutes.  Seattle forward Mike Fucito had the first goal scoring opportunity of the match in the eighth minute as he broke free in the penalty area and took a shot on goal.  The shot was kicked away by Fire goalkeeper Sean Johnson. Neither side appeared to gain control as the match progressed through the first 10 minutes.  In the 11th minute, Chicago midfielder Marco Pappa slipped between two defenders in the middle of the field and had a long range shot go just wide of the net.  Two minutes later Pappa again had a long shot which forced Seattle goalkeeper Kasey Keller to make a save. Pappa was responsible for all five of his team's shots in the first half.  In the 26th minute, Patrick Nyarko was shown a yellow card by referee Alex Prus for a hard tackle on Seattle's Osvaldo Alonso near the touch-line.As the match passed the 30 minute mark, Seattle began to take control as they held possession and created more scoring opportunities.  Five minutes before half time Marco Pappa again tested the Seattle goalkeeper as he cut inside a defender and took a shot from 30 yards.  The shot forced Kasey Keller to make a diving save.  In the 44th minute Seattle striker Mike Fucito rushed onto a poor backpass by the Chicago defense and then backhealed a pass to Alvaro Fernandez who was streaking into the box.  His shot was stopped with a reaching save by Chicago goalkeeper Sean Johnson. One minute later, in first half injury time, Seattle striker Fredy Montero nearly scored with a 20-yard shot that flew past the keeper and bounced off the left goal post. The half ended with the score tied 0–0.
At half time, Seattle midfielder Erik Frieberg was subbed on for Alvaro Fernandez, who had suffered a slight concussion during the first half.  Shortly after the second half began, Seattle nearly broke the stalemate.  In the 53rd minute, a Sounders FC throw-in was flicked on to Mike Fucito, who lifted a shot up and over the keeper.  His shot was chased by several Chicago defenders as it crossed the goal mouth and bounced off the far goal post and back into play.  In the 78th minute, Montero broke the deadlock on a corner kick taken by Erik Friberg. Sounders FC defender Jeff Parke headed the corner kick on goal and Chicago goalkeeper Sean Johnson saved the shot.  The ball rebounded to the feet of Fredy Montero, who tapped the ball into the net for in the first goal of the game. Sounders FC now had a 1–0 lead.For much of the first half and early second half, Sounders FC's defensive efforts had been focused on closely defending Chicago midfield Pável Pardo.  With Pardo unable to distribute the ball to Chicago's speedy wingers, Patrick Nyarko and Domonic Oduro, Chicago's offense had been effectively neutralized for much of the match. Fire coach Frank Klopas made two substitutions late in the match, bringing on forward Diego Chaves in the 80th minute and midfielder Sebastián Grazzini in the 85th.  Chicago's best chance of the half came in the 90th minute when Dominic Oduro headed a shot toward Kasey Keller, who made the save even though the attempt was ruled offside.As the match neared its conclusion, Chicago shifted players forward as they searched for an equalizing goal. However, in the sixth minute of stoppage time, Osvaldo Alonso scored Seattle's second goal on a counterattack play as he dribbled around multiple defenders and the goalkeeper and finally tapped the ball into the net.  The goal gave Sounders FC a 2–0 lead and sealed the victory.
Most of the record crowd remained after the game as they watched Seattle players and coaches engaged in the post match trophy awarding ceremony and celebrated on the field.  In the post match press conference, Sigi Schmid praised his team's defensive efforts in the match, saying "We talked about making sure their defenders – and primarily Pável Pardo – didn’t have a chance to lift their heads and hit those long balls in behind." Schmid continued, "I thought Evans did a really good job. Sometimes we were stretched in the midfield, but I thought he did a very good job of stepping up to Pável. When you look at the 90 minutes, it was a rare occasion that he was able to hit a ball behind our defense."  Chicago midfielder Logan Pause commented on the game saying, "It’s disappointing. We came here to win. We were under the gun all night. They’re a great team, one of the best in the league. It was a great atmosphere and home field advantage. The better team won tonight unfortunately."The day after the match, Sounders FC flew a 3,000-square-foot (280 m2) scarf over Seattle and Bellevue in the afternoon and early evening respectively, in celebration of their victory. By winning the final, Sounders FC became the first MLS team to win the competition three times in a row, and the first club to do so in the competition since Greek American Atlas did so in 1968, 42 years earlier. Seattle also became the fourth team in the 98-year history of the tournament to win three in a row.  As U.S. Open Cup champions, Seattle received the $100,000 cash prize while Chicago was given $50,000 as the runner up.  Seattle also earned a berth in the 2012–13 CONCACAF Champions League with the victory. In the Champions League, Seattle won their group and were eventually knocked out of the tournament in the semifinals by Mexican club Santos Laguna.Sounders FC midfielder Osvaldo Alonso was voted the "player of the round" for the final.  Alonso was recognized for his goal scoring effort as well as his record-setting fourth consecutive appearance as a player in the U.S. Open Cup final match.  He had appeared first with the Charleston Battery in the 2008 final and then 3 times with Seattle from 2009 to 2011. Seattle forward Fredy Montero was recognized as the "player of the tournament" as he scored the game winning goals for Sounders FC in their quarterfinal, semifinal, and final matches. Osvaldo Alonso was one of the four finalists for "player of the tournament" along with Montero and two players from the semifinalist Richmond Kickers–Ronnie Pascale and David Bulow.
U.S. Soccer was criticized after the match for the secretive bid process that allows teams to outspend their opponents for hosting rights.  Both the blind bidding process for hosting tournament matches and the manner in which MLS teams qualified for the tournament were widely criticized.  An example of the concerns raised around hosting came from FC Dallas midfielder Daniel Hernandez on Twitter, where he complained about Seattle's home-field advantage throughout the 2011 tournament.  Following the final, MLS and U.S. Soccer officials met to discuss rule changes to the tournament's host bidding system and team qualification processes.  Sounders FC owner Adrian Hanauer commented on the changes and the possibility of raising the profile of the tournament, "I don’t think the bidding process is going to change the profile of the tournament, necessarily. It might make a few people happy, it might make a few people unhappy. But ultimately, I’m not convinced that’s what is going to raise the profile."In January 2012, in preparation for the 2012 edition of the U.S. Open Cup, U.S. Soccer announced several changes to the tournament format.  Included in these changes was the introduction of a new host selection process.  Beginning in 2012, for all rounds of the tournament through the quarterfinals, a random host selection process would be used. While in previous years a blind bidding system was used to determine the host of a match, the new process has the host determined by blind draw if both teams' venues meet minimum standards. The blind bidding system for hosting rights remained in effect for the semifinals and final of the 2012 tournament.  However, U.S. Soccer announced in 2013 that hosting for all rounds of the tournament would be determined randomly as long as both venues met minimum standards.

The 2012–13 Michigan Wolverines men's basketball team represented the University of Michigan during the 2012–13 NCAA Division I men's basketball season.the Michigan Wolverines men's basketball team played its home games in Ann Arbor, Michigan, at the Crisler Center. This season marked the team's 96th consecutive year as a member of the Big Ten Conference, and it is occasionally referred to as "Team 96". The team was led by sixth-year head coach John Beilein. As the defending 2011–12 Big Ten Conference men's basketball season regular season co-champions, the Wolverines finished fourth in the conference in 2012–13 and as National Runner-up in the 2013 NCAA Men's Division I Basketball Tournament after losing in the championship game to Louisville. Louisville's win was later vacated due to the 2015 University of Louisville basketball sex scandal. The team achieved a 31–8 record, the most wins by the program in 20 seasons.
Following the 2011–12 season, the team lost graduating senior captains Zack Novak and Stu Douglass, who moved on to professional basketball careers in Europe. The incoming class of Mitch McGary, Glenn Robinson III and Nik Stauskas was ranked among the best classes in the nation by the media. With its new lineup, the team matched the greatest starts in school history. Starting the season with 11 consecutive wins matched the best start since Michigan's 1989 national champions, the 1988–89 team. At 16–0, Michigan matched its best start since the last repeat Big Ten Regular season championship, the 1985–86 team, tying a school record. Reaching 19–1 set a record for the best start in school history.  The team also reached the number one position in the AP Poll for the first time since the Fab Five 1992–93 team. The team entered February with a 20–1 record (7–1 Big Ten), but with an injury to eventual B1G All-Defensive selection Jordan Morgan and a stretch of games against its strongest conference opponents, Michigan lost three out of four games. The team closed the season with a 5–5 run to finish tied for fourth in the conference and won one game in the Big Ten Tournament before being eliminated.
The team was led by 2013 national player of the year, Big Ten Player of the Year and 2013 Consensus All-American Trey Burke and three additional All-Conference honorees. Tim Hardaway, Jr. was named to the 2012–13 All-Big Ten first team by the coaches and to the second team by the media; Robinson was named an honorable mention All-Big Ten by the media, and Morgan was an All-Big Ten Defensive team selection. Stauskas and McGary earned multiple Big Ten Freshman of the Week recognitions during the season. Burke was the second National Player of the Year and eighth first-team consensus All-American in Michigan basketball history.
Michigan entered the 2013 NCAA Men's Division I Basketball Tournament as the youngest team in the field. The team made its first Sweet Sixteen appearance since the 1993–94 team did so. The Wolverines made their first "official" appearance in the Final Four and the national title game since the 1989 national championship season; appearances in 1992 and 1993 were vacated due to a scandal. Following the season, at the 2013 NBA Draft, Burke and Hardaway were selected ninth and twenty-fourth, respectively, becoming the first pair of first-round NBA draft choices from Michigan since the 1994 NBA Draft.
The team lost both of its captains from the prior season to graduation after they completed their eligibility. Senior two-time captain Douglass turned pro, joining Basket Navarra Club of the Liga Española de Baloncesto. Senior three-time captain Novak graduated to play for Landstede Basketbal in the Dutch Basketball League. In addition to the loss of senior co-captains, the team lost three players who decided to transfer: Evan Smotrycz, Carlton Brundidge and Colton Christian. Smotrycz, who transferred to Maryland, had started in 42 of the 69 games he played during his first two years. He left the program as the fifth-best all-time three-point shooter with a percentage of 40.5. Brundidge transferred to Detroit and Christian transferred to Florida International. The program also announced the departure of walk-on Sai Tummala  and the return of walk-on Corey Person for a fifth year.
Glenn Robinson III, son of former first overall NBA draft pick Glenn Robinson, verbally committed on September 14, 2010 as the first commitment in Michigan's class of 2012. On March 26, 2011, Michigan received its second verbal commitment of the class of 2012 from Canadian wing guard Nik Stauskas. On November 3, Mitch McGary, who was ranked as the number two prospect in the nation at the time, announced his verbal commitment to Michigan. Within hours of the commitment, ESPN announced that Michigan ranked as the fifth best class in the nation. Each of the three signed a National Letter of Intent with the team on November 9. After several other schools announced their commitments, the signing of McGary moved Michigan from outside the top 25 at the end of October to the number 7 class in the nation by mid-November, according to ESPN. That November, McGary, Robinson and Stauskas ranked 3, 34, and 79, respectively, in the Rivals.com Class of 2012 Top 150.
All three recruits had playoff success: McGary was a member of Brewster Academy's National Prep Championship team. Stauskas earned the championship game MVP of the NEPSAC Class AA Championship after leading St. Mark's to victory. Robinson led Lake Central to its first Indiana High School Athletic Association sectional title in 15 years. He earned the Post-Tribune's Boys basketball player of the year award for Northwest Indiana and the state MVP from the Indiana Basketball News.McGary was invited to participate in the four-team April 1, 2012 All-American Championship, along with future teammate Robinson in New Orleans. Robinson was awarded the ESPNHS All-American Championship Player of the Game for his 16-point, 4-rebound performance, which included 5 dunks among his 6-for-7 shooting night. McGary was also selected to represent USA Basketball at the fifteenth annual Nike Hoops Summit on April 7 as part of the 2012 USA Junior National Select Team.Michael "Spike" Albrecht committed to Michigan on April 6, 2012. Albrecht led Northfield Mount Hermon School to the 2012 NEPSAC Class AAA Boys' Basketball Tournament, defeating McGary's Brewster Academy in the semifinals. Albrecht was MVP of the tournament. Albrecht was a former AAU teammate of McGary and Robinson. Albrecht's and outgoing captain Novak's fathers were collegiate teammates. Albrecht was a 2011 graduate of Crown Point High School.  After most of the big signings announced their decisions on the April 11 signing day, Michigan was ranked as the early number 5 preseason selection as a team by ESPN.
Zak Irvin was named 2013 Indiana Mr. Basketball, giving Hamilton Southeastern High School the state's first back-to-back winners (Gary Harris) from the same high school. Derrick Walton was runner up in the 2013 Mr. Basketball of Michigan by a 2130–2086 margin to Iowa State signee Monte Morris despite having one more first place vote. Both Walton and Irvin were 2013 Parade All-American honorees and were named state Boys Basketball Gatorade Player of the Year.
Michigan basketball hosted its on campus media day press conference on October 10, 2012 at Crisler Center. The team was represented by Burke, Hardaway, Morgan and Beilein at the Big Ten Conference Basketball Media Day press conference on October 24 in Rosemont, Illinois. When the 24-person Big Ten Media poll was announced, Michigan was predicted to finish second to Indiana. Burke was a preseason All-Conference selection by the same media.Michigan enjoyed high expectations from the national media as well during the preseason. Sporting News named them to the number 5 position in its preseason poll, while conference foes Indiana and Ohio State were ranked number 1 and 3, respectively. Michigan also earned the number 5 ranking in both the preseason Coaches' Poll and preseason Associated Press poll, but behind Indiana (#1) and Ohio State (#4) in both. This was Michigan's highest preseason ranking since the 1992–93 team. Sports Illustrated ranked Michigan number 9 in its October preseason power rankings, again behind Indiana (#1) and Ohio State (#6), but when it printed its November preseason poll listed Michigan at number 6 ahead of Ohio State (#7), but behind Indiana (#1). Prior to the first exhibition game on November 1, senior Josh Bartelstein was named team captain.ESPN's Eamonn Brennan noted that Michigan was a perimeter oriented team with possibly the best one-two guard combination in the country. Burke and Hardaway were both preseason John R. Wooden Award top 50 selections. Burke was a preseason All-American (Associated Press first team, CBS Sports second team, Sports Illustrated second team, ESPN second team, Sporting News third team) as well as a preseason Naismith Award top 50 selection.
The acronym "WE ON" was the slogan for the whole team for the 2012–13 season. The team and coaching staff selected it at the beginning of the season as another way for Michigan to say Bo Schembechler's famous quote, "the Team, the Team, the Team." The acronym "WE ON" stands for "When Everyone Operates N'sync." Michigan assistant coach Bacari Alexander even tweeted that the acronym summarizes this team-focused mindset. According to Dave Brandon,  assistant coach LaVall Jordan and director of basketball operations Travis Conlan guided the team to develop the slogan.Adidas warm up shirts were created and were first worn on November 21, 2012, before Michigan's NIT Season Tip-Off game against the Pittsburgh Panthers. The shirts use the school colors with blue with maize lettering. On February 12, 2013, when Michigan played the first of two regularly scheduled rivalry games against Michigan State, students in the Izzone at the Breslin Center wore T-shirts with "YOU OFF" printed in Spartan colors (green and white). Michigan State went on to win the game by 23 points."WE" – WE is also an acronym for "Wolverine Excellence", which is chiefly used by the team. Wolverine Excellence calls for players and managers to focus on its five core values: integrity, unity, passion, diligence and appreciation."ON" – ON represented each player's individual commitment to season-long improvement. There was a "U-M Fuse Box" (mock-University of Michigan set of switches) in the Men's Basketball locker room in Crisler Center. Each player had selected one word on which to focus during the season and before every practice and game, each player flipped his switch "on." This represented each player's commitment to improvement every day.
Prior to the season, the five freshmen were dubbed the "Fresh Five", a moniker hearkening remembrance of the incoming freshman class of 1991, known as the Fab Five, that led Michigan to back-to-back Championship games while starting the majority of games. However, the nickname and its expectations were downplayed most of the season by the team. Nonetheless, during the final two weeks of the regular season The New York Times ran a feature story on the team that reinvigorated the nickname while noting that the current five were the supporting cast rather than the stars of the team like the original five.
ESPN's Chantel Jennings tweeted a picture of a Flag of Canada redone in Michigan's team colors of maize and blue at Crisler Arena on December 4. One of her followers noted that the big version on the wall was a general Stauskas fan flag and that a little version of the flag was added next to it for each three-pointer Canadian Stauskas made in the game. By mid-December of his freshman season, the students in the Maize Rage (Michigan student section at Crisler Arena) had begun cheering Stauskas on with such a flag. The Michigan Public & Media Relations office started mentioning the flag before Christmas. The flag was mentioned widely in the press as he continued his hot shooting into January.
 Through the first week of January, Stauskas was shooting 53.7% on three-point shots as the team held a 15–0 record.
The team, which represented Michigan Basketball for the ninety-sixth season in the Big Ten Conference, is sometimes referred to as Team 96 or Squad 96. Although this team represented Michigan for the ninety-sixth consecutive year, there was controversy as to whether the team should in fact be marketed as Team 96 because the 1908–09 Michigan Wolverines men's basketball team was not properly accounted for among the prior teams. The subsequent team was marketed as Team 98.
Hardaway began the season with his fourth career double-double by scoring 25 points (including 5-for-5 three-point shooting) and adding 10 rebounds in a 100–62 win over Slippery Rock; this earned him his second career Big Ten Player of the Week award.  The 100-point performance of November 9 was Michigan's first since the 2007–08 team posted 103 points against Oakland on December 12, 2007.Michigan hosted games for the first two rounds of the 2012 NIT Season Tip-Off. The team's first game of the tournament, a November 12 contest against the IUPUI Jaguars, resulted in a 91–54 Michigan victory. The win also gave Michigan its first consecutive 90-point performances since the 2000–01 team recorded three consecutive 90-point games. The following night, Michigan defeated Cleveland State by a 77–47 margin, marking the first time the school opened the season with three consecutive 30-point victories. The win also marked the first time Michigan had posted three consecutive 30-point wins since the 1988–89 Wolverines team (the 1989 national champion) won five consecutive 30-point games.In the championship rounds of the NIT Season Tip-Off tournament at Madison Square Garden on November 21 and 23, Michigan defeated Pittsburgh and Kansas State, respectively, to win the tournament. Hardaway, who totaled 39 points at the Garden, was the tournament MVP and was joined on the all-tournament team by Burke, who contributed 27 points and 10 assists. Stauskas earned Big Ten Freshman of the Week honors for his NIT tournament performance in which he averaged 12.5 points and 4.5 rebounds. On November 27, Michigan raised its Big Ten championship banner from the season before. Then, the team defeated its first ranked opponent of the season – NC State (#18 AP/#18 Coaches) – in the ACC–Big Ten Challenge. The win was supported by Burke's first career double-double which included a career-high 11 assists, no turnovers and 18 points as well as a career-high 20 points from Stauskas in a 79–72 victory.
Ranked third in both polls, Michigan established a record as the highest ranked visiting team in the history of Carver Arena on December 1. Giving Stauskas his first career start, Michigan emerged victorious over Bradley.  It was the third game of the season that Michigan never trailed in. Stauskas repeated as Big Ten Freshman of the Week on December 3 for his back-to-back 20-point performances.On December 4, Michigan defeated Western Michigan 73–41, giving the team its first 8–0 start since the 1996–97 team; the team never trailed in the game. Michigan defeated Arkansas 80–67 in its December 8 matchup. It marked the fourth 9–0 start in school history (1988–89, 1985–86 and 1926–27) and the third consecutive game that Michigan never trailed. Michigan went to 10–0 on December 11 by defeating Binghamton 67–39.Michigan traveled to play in the December 15 Brooklyn Hoops Winter Festival at the Barclays Center, where they defeated West Virginia (coach Beilein's previous employer) 81–66 to move to 11–0 for the third time in school history (1985–86 and 1988–89). The team never trailed in the contest. For averaging 23.0 points, 6.5 assists, 4.5 rebounds and 2.0 steals with only 1.0 turnover in the games against Binghamton and West Virginia, Burke earned Player of the Week on December 17.On December 20, the team became the second in school in history (1985–86 went 16–0) to reach 12–0 when it beat Eastern Michigan. After recording his first career double-double in the game with only 18 minutes of play, McGary was recognized as Big Ten Freshman of the Week. Hardaway suffered an ankle injury that caused him to miss the December 29 game against Central Michigan and that broke his 81 consecutive games played streak that went back to the beginning of his Michigan career. The game also marked the team's second game without Jon Horford, who dislocated his knee during the West Virginia game. In Hardaway's absence, Burke posted his second career double-double with 22 points and a career-high tying 11 assists and Robinson posted his second career 20-point game. Stauskas added career highs with 5 three-pointers and 7 rebounds and earned his third Big Ten Freshman of the Week award on December 31. The thirteenth win clinched Michigan's ninth perfect non-conference regular season record. The team never trailed in the contest.
On January 3, Michigan opened the 2012–13 Big Ten conference schedule with a 94–66 win over Northwestern to move to 14–0. Burke had 23 points, 5 assists and a career high 4 steals, while Hardaway added 21 points, Morgan posted a double-double with 12 points and 13 rebounds, while Stauskas and Robinson added 10 points each.  Burke and Robinson both posted their third and first career double-doubles, respectively, in a 95–67 victory against Iowa on  January 6. It marked the first time that the team scored 90 points in back-to-back conference games since the 1999–2000 team and tied for the most points in a conference game since the 1997–98 team. On January 7, Burke was recognized as Big Ten Conference Player of the Week and Robinson was recognized as Conference Freshman of the Week.The team tied the school record for best start by defeating Nebraska for its 16th straight victory to start the season on January 9. The victory also marked Beilein's 400th Division I coaching victory. On January 13, the team lost to Ohio State (#15 AP/#14 Coaches) snapping their winning streak. Horford returned to the lineup after missing 5 games. Michigan had been the only remaining unbeaten team and was expected to be ranked #1 if they had won. The loss was Michigan's 9th straight in Columbus.Michigan defeated Minnesota (#9 AP/#12 Coaches) at Williams Arena on January 17, marking the first time Michigan defeated a top-10 team on the road since a December 6, 1996, victory by the 1996–97 team over Duke. After his performance, in which he scored 21 points while making 7 of 8 shots and 4 of 5 three-point shots, in addition to recording 5 rebounds, 3 assists, 3 steals and 2 blocks, Hardaway earned a second Big Ten Player of the Week Award.Michigan defeated Purdue 68–53 on January 24 and Illinois 74–60 on January 27. This gave Michigan the first 19–1 start in school history. Robinson earned his second Big Ten Freshman of the Week award on January 28 for a pair of 12-point performances during a week in which he averaged 8 rebounds while maintaining 71.4% field goal percentage. Later that day, Michigan was ranked number one in the AP Poll with 51 of the 65 first place votes. It marked the first time Michigan ranked atop the AP Poll since the Fab Five 1992–93 team did so on December 5, 1992.Michigan concluded January by beating Northwestern a second time on January 30, becoming the first team in the country to reach 20 wins. After enduring an injured ankle against Illinois, starting center Jordan Morgan missed his first game since redshirting a full season for the 2009–10 Wolverines when he sat out the Northwestern game. Horford started in his place.
On February 2, 2013, Michigan (#1 AP/#2 Coaches) appeared on ESPN's College GameDay against Indiana (#3 AP/#3 Coaches) who hosted the game at Assembly Hall. Michigan lost 81–73, but the television broadcast of the game on ESPN set a Big Ten record for viewership with 4.035 million viewers. Morgan only played two minutes behind replacement starter Horford. Michigan then defeated Ohio State (#10 AP/#10 Coaches) in overtime in the rematch at home on February 5. Starting center Morgan only played 4 minutes. Coach Beilein noted that Morgan's absence affected the team's ability to match up defensively and substitute as it desired.Michigan lost to Wisconsin on February 9 in overtime following a half-court buzzer beater by Wisconsin that tied the game in regulation It marked Michigan's eleventh consecutive loss against Wisconsin on the road. Morgan did not play, but McGary played 32 minutes, totaling 12 points, 3 steals and 8 rebounds. However, dramatically increased play in Morgan's absence enabled McGary to earn his second Big Ten Freshman of the Week honor on February 11.On February 12, Michigan lost 75–52 in its rivalry game against (#8 AP/#8 Coaches) Michigan State. Among those in attendance were Rick Snyder, Matthew Stafford, Mark Dantonio, Brady Hoke, and Lloyd Carr. It marked the first time both teams were ranked in the top ten of the AP Poll, and resulted in Michigan losing back-to-back games and three consecutive road games for the first time since the 2010–11 team did so. Burke's 18 points, 4 assists and 3 steals were one of Michigan's few bright spots in their February 12 contest.On February 17 against Penn State, Burke posted a season-high 29 points along with 5 assists, 3 rebounds and two steals. As a result of his efforts, Burke won his third player of the week award of the season and fourth of his career on February 18. Morgan returned to the starting lineup in the Penn State contest, but he only played 7 minutes.After playing only 22 total minutes since January 27, Morgan played more minutes (17) than the other low post players (McGary, Horford, and Max Bielfeldt) for the first time on February 24 against Illinois. Michigan defeated Illinois 71–58 behind 26 points and 8 assists from Burke. In the game, Burke became the seventh Wolverine sophomore to reach 1000 career points. On February 27, Michigan surrendered a 15-point second-half lead to give Penn State its only conference win of the season. Following the game, the team called a rare players-only meeting at the Pizza House, with fifth-year reserve Corey Person doing most of the talking.
On March 3, Michigan defeated Michigan State (#9 AP/#10 Coaches) in the Ann Arbor rematch of their rivalry series as Trey Burke made 2 steals in the final 30 seconds to secure the 58–57 victory. Michigan snapped a 453-game streak with at least one made three-point shot and became the first team since February 2009 to defeat a top ten opponent without making one. On March 6, with its Big 10 Conference Championship destiny in its own hands, Michigan defeated Purdue to set up a championship showdown with Indiana on March 10. Michigan concluded its road schedule with a 5–5 record.Michigan closed out the season by losing to Indiana (#2 AP/#2 Coaches) on March 10, failing its pursuit of defense of its conference co-championship. Michigan led by 5 with 52 seconds to go, but then missed 3 free throws, including the first attempt during 2 one-and-one situations. Burke and Morgan also missed last-second shots at the rim. Michigan wound down its regular season with its fifteenth sellout and five seniors on the roster: Eso Akunne, Josh Bartelstein, Blake McLimans, Corey Person, and Matt Vogrich. The loss kept Michigan from its first undefeated home season since the 1976–77 team.
Michigan participated in the 2013 Big Ten Conference Men's Basketball Tournament at the United Center in Chicago. As the #5 seed, they defeated Penn State in the opening round on March 14 by an 83–66 margin. In the second round, the team lost to Wisconsin, 68–59. Prior to the 2013 NCAA Men's Division I Basketball Tournament, Jeff Goodman of CBSSports.com named Michigan first among tournament teams in terms of having the most future NBA talent on its roster (in the absence of Kentucky, which was left to accept an invitation to the 2013 National Invitation Tournament). Among Michigan's starting lineup, Burke, Robinson, Hardaway, and McGary were all expected to be likely NBA Draft choices, while Stauskas had the potential to be one.Despite its highly touted lineup, Michigan entered the tournament as the sixth youngest team in the country and the youngest team in the field of 68 teams according to Sports Illustrated, based on weighted minutes played. The game marked Michigan's first NCAA Championship Monday appearance since 1989. Some sources claim 1993 as the school's last appearance, but those results have been vacated by the NCAA due to the University of Michigan basketball scandal.
Michigan was entered in the tournament's South region where it would play its first two games at The Palace of Auburn Hills in nearby Auburn Hills, Michigan. As a number four seed, Michigan opened the tournament by defeating South Dakota State 71–56, giving the team its most wins in 20 years and matching Beilein's career high as it raised its record to 27–7. Michigan then ousted 5th-seeded VCU by a 78–53 margin. That gave Michigan its first Sweet Sixteen appearance since the 1993–94 team went to the 1994 NCAA Men's Division I Basketball Tournament.
The regional championship rounds for Michigan were at AT&T Stadium in Arlington, Texas. On March 29 against Kansas, Michigan overcame a 14-point deficit with 6:50 remaining and a 10-point deficit with 2:52 remaining to force overtime before an eventual victory. Burke scored eight points in the final 1:15 of regulation time, including a game-tying long three-pointer with 4.2 seconds remaining. McGary (25 points and 14 rebounds) and Burke (23 points and 10 assists) both posted double-doubles.In the regional finals on March 31 against Florida, Michigan built a 13–0 lead and never led by less than 10 the rest of the game. Several players had career-highs in the game: Stauskas with 6 three-point shots, Burke 8 rebounds, McGary 5 steals and off the bench Albrecht 7 points and 3 steals. Eight of McGary's 11 points came as Michigan built the initial 13–0 lead and 5 of Stauskas' 6 three-pointers came as Michigan built a 41–17 lead and closed the half with a 47–30 lead. Burke was named South Regional Tournament Most Outstanding Player. McGary and Stauskas joined Burke on the five-man South All-Regional team. Following the regional championship postgame prayer and with Mrs. Beilein's consent, McGary and Hardaway gave Beilein a Gatorade shower.
The national championship rounds were held at the Georgia Dome in Atlanta, Georgia. In the April 6 national semifinal against Syracuse, Michigan emerged with its thirty-first victory, the most since the 1992–93 team went 31–5. McGary posted 10 points, 12 rebounds and 6 assists, while the bench contributed 22 points, including 6 from Albrecht, who raised his NCAA tournament total to 5-for-5 on three-point shots.Michigan lost the April 8 national championship game against Midwest number one seed Louisville by an 82–76 score. Albrecht scored 17 first-half points on 4-for-4 three-point shooting. Burke scored 24 points in the championship game and made the seven-man All-Tournament team (which was revised multiple times) along with teammates McGary and Albrecht. The turning point of the game was described as a missed call by the referees when, as Michigan trailed 67–64 with 5 minutes left, Burke pinned Peyton Siva's dunk attempt with a clean, all-ball block, but was called for a foul, resulting in two made free throws by Siva. Michigan never got closer than 4 points the rest of the game. Louisville's championship has since been vacated by the NCAA, as well as all its wins from 2011 to 2015. This followed an escort recruitment scandal at the university.
Burke's 260 assists set a school single-season record. He also finished his sophomore season with 1,231 career points, surpassing the former school record for sophomore season career point total of 1,218 by Chris Webber. Stauskas reached a total of 80 made three-point shots, which surpassed Hardaway's 2-year-old school freshman season record of 76.
Stauskas also earned recognition from Sports Illustrated's Seth Davis as National Freshman of the Week on December 3. On January 9, Burke earned the Oscar Robertson National Player of the Week from the United States Basketball Writers Association (USBWA).  Burke also earned ESPN.com Player of the Week recognition on April 1.The Wooden Award midseason top 25 list, which included Burke, was announced on January 10. On January 31, Burke was named to the Oscar Robertson Trophy (USBWA National Player of the Year) midseason top 12 list, while Stuaskas and Robinson were named to the Wayman Tisdale Award (USBWA National Freshman of the Year) top 12 midseason list.  Burke was one of six Big Ten players named among the top 30 finalists for the Naismith Award when the list was announced on February 26. Burke was among four Big Ten Players on the March 4, 14-man Robertson watchlist. On March 9, Burke was named among the top 15 Wooden Award finalists. On March 11, Burke was named one of five finalists for the Cousy Award.  Burke was named one of four finalists for the Naismith Award on March 24.Burke was named a first-team All-American by Sporting News on March 11, the USBWA on March 18, Sports Illustrated on March 19,  CBSSports.com on March 20, the National Association of Basketball Coaches (NABC) on March 28, and the Associated Press on April 1. Burke was one of four Big Ten players named to the 10-man Wooden All-American team of finalists for the Wooden Award on April 1. On April 1, Robinson was one of two Big Ten players (Harris) named to the 21-man 2013 Kyle Macy Freshman All-America team. Burke became the fifth Consensus All-American (Cazzie Russell, Rickey Green, Gary Grant and Webber) in school history.SI also named Burke National Player of the Year, making him the second (Russell, 1966) National Player of the Year in school history. On April 4, Burke won the Bob Cousy Award and was named Associated Press College Basketball Player of the Year. Burke won both the Oscar Robertson Trophy from the USBWA as well as the John R. Wooden Award on April 5. On April 7, he won the NABC Player of the Year and Naismith College Player of the Year awards, giving him a sweep of the four major player of the year awards.Burke earned Big Ten Conference Men's Basketball Player of the Year in 2013 and was a unanimous 2012–13 All-Big Ten 1st team selection. Hardaway was a 1st team selection by the coaches and second team by the media. Robinson was an honorable mention All-Conference selection and All-freshman honoree by the coaches. Morgan was a coaches All-defensive team selection. On March 12, the USBWA named Burke and Hardaway to its 2012–13 Men's All-District V (OH, IN, IL, MI, MN, WI) Team, based upon voting from its national membership. Burke was recognized as District V Player of the Year. Burke and Hardaway were selected to the NABC Division I All‐District 7 first team on March 26, as selected and voted on by member coaches of the NABC, making them eligible for the State Farm Coaches' Division I All-America team. On that same day, Burke was selected to the 21-man 2013 Lute Olson All-America Team.John Beilein was selected as an assistant coach for the 2013 World University Games. Seniors Josh Bartelstein and Matt Vogrich were among the 38 Big Ten men's basketball players recognized as Winter Academic All-Big Ten for maintaining 3.0 averages. Trey Burke was named team MVP.
Prior to the final four, McGary stated that he would not enter the 2013 NBA Draft, but a few days later said he had been caught off guard and would prefer to respond after he had time to reflect on his season.At 12:30 PM ET on April 4, Forbes sports business reporter Darren Heitner tweeted that Burke and teammate Hardaway would declare for the 2013 NBA Draft. According to Heiter, one of Burke's potential sports agents was Alonzo Shavers, who had known Burke since his birth. Burke's mother responded at 2:15 PM that same day that "He has not made any decision" about going pro, according to Yahoo! Sports reporter Eric Adelson. At 2:23 PM, Heitner tweeted that Hardaway, Sr. said his son was undecided.On April 9 before boarding the airplane to return from the NCAA Final Four, Beilein met with Burke, Hardaway, Robinson and McGary to direct them to seek the advice of the NBA advisory committee. The draft board had until April 15 to develop each individual report and the players had until April 28 to enter the draft.  On that same date, ESPN's Jason King predicted that if all four players had left for the NBA draft, the 2013–14 team would have begun the season unranked. USA Today projected on April 9 that if one of the four possible 2013 NBA draft entrants returned, Michigan could have been ranked number twenty-four, and that if they all returned, Michigan would have been preseason number one. ESPN journalist Myron Medcalf predicted on April 12 that Burke and Hardaway would enter the draft and that McGary and Robinson were on the borderline of doing so.On April 13, reports surfaced that Burke would announce that he would enter the NBA Draft at a press conference the following day. He entered the 2013 NBA Draft on April 14. On April 17, Hardaway declared for the NBA Draft. McGary and Robinson announced on April 18 that they had decided not to enter their names in the NBA Draft.On June 27, 2013 Burke was selected ninth in the 2013 NBA Draft by the Milwaukee Bucks and then traded to the Utah Jazz for the fourteenth and twenty-first picks, which were used to select Shabazz Muhammad and Gorgui Dieng. Hardaway was drafted twenty-fourth by the New York Knicks. Burke and Hardaway became the first Michigan duo selected in the first round since Juwan Howard and Jalen Rose in the 1994 NBA Draft. Burke became the first top-10 Wolverine selection since Jamal Crawford in the 2000 NBA Draft, and joined Victor Oladipo and Cody Zeller, who were selected second and fourth, respectively, to give the Big Ten its first top ten trio since the 1990 NBA Draft. Hardaway joined his father, who was picked fourteenth in 1989 NBA Draft, as a first round selection.
Every player that started in the 2013 national championship game was drafted either in the 2013 or 2014 NBA draft. Four players from Michigan's 2012 entering class were eventually drafted in the NBA draft (Stauskas, McGary, Robinson and LeVert).
Following the season the team lost five seniors from the roster: guard Eso Akunne, guard Josh Bartelstein (captain), forward Blake McLimans, guard Corey Person and guard Matt Vogrich. The team's required 10-year dissociation with players implicated in the University of Michigan basketball scandal ended on May 8, 2013. Bartelstein blogged for the team from October 15, 2010, until April 11, 2013. His blogs from this season were turned into an ebook about the season entitled We On: Behind the Scenes of Michigan's Final Four Run.
