
Gillingham F.C. is an English football club based in Gillingham, Kent.  The club was formed in 1893, and played in the Southern League until 1920, when that league's top division was absorbed into the Football League as its new Division Three.  The club was voted out of the league in favour of Ipswich Town at the end of the 1937–38 season, but returned 12 years later, when that league was expanded from 88 to 92 clubs.  Twice in the late 1980s Gillingham came close to winning promotion to the second tier of English football, but a decline then set in and in 1993 the club narrowly avoided relegation to the Football Conference.  In 2000, the "Gills" reached the second tier of the English league for the first time in the club's history and went on to spend five seasons at this level, achieving a club record highest league finish of eleventh place in 2002–03.  The club has twice won the division comprising the fourth level in the football league: the Football League Fourth Division championship in 1963–64 and the Football League Two championship in 2012–13.
The local success of a junior football side, Chatham Excelsior F.C., encouraged a group of businessmen to meet at the Napier Arms pub on 18 May 1893, with a view to creating a football club that could compete in larger competitions. To do this, the club required an enclosed playing area where an admission fee could be charged, which Excelsior lacked. New Brompton F.C. was formed at the meeting, incorporating a number of Excelsior players.  The group also purchased the plot of land which would later become Priestfield Stadium, where a pitch was quickly laid and a pavilion constructed.  New Brompton's first team played their first match on 2 September 1893, with the new team, sporting Excelsior's black and white stripes, being defeated 5–1 by Woolwich Arsenal's reserve team in front of a crowd of 2,000.  As a "curtain-raiser" immediately prior to this match, New Brompton's own reserves played a match against Grays, which was therefore technically the first match played by a team representing the club.New Brompton joined the Southern League upon its creation in 1894, being placed in Division Two because it was one of the last clubs to be invited to join the league. Upon joining the league, New Brompton turned professional, with the players agreeing to be paid 12 shillings per match, and promptly won the Division Two championship in the 1894–95 season. With a record of one defeat and eleven victories from twelve matches, the team concluded the season with a "test match" against Swindon Town, who had finished bottom of Division One. As 5–1 winners, New Brompton gained promotion to Division One the following season.  In 1896 the club appointed its first manager when William Ironside Groombridge, who had previously served as the club's financial secretary, took charge of team affairs.  Groombridge served the club, as secretary and sometimes manager, until well after the First World War.
New Brompton struggled in Division One, generally finishing close to the foot of the table, but did reach the first round proper of the FA Cup for the first time in 1899–1900, losing 1–0 to Southampton.  In the same season the club was forced to play a league fixture at the home ground of Woolwich Arsenal when Priestfield was closed due to crowd trouble in a match against Millwall.In the 1907–08 season, under the management of the former England international Stephen Smith, New Brompton finished bottom of the table,
 avoiding relegation only due to the expansion of the league, but did achieve a cup victory over First Division Sunderland, remembered for a hat-trick from Charlie McGibbon.In 1912 the directors passed a resolution to change the club's name to Gillingham F.C., and the team played under this name throughout the 1912–13 season, although the change was not officially ratified by the shareholders until the following year.  To coincide with the change, the team began sporting a new kit of red shirts with blue sleeves.  The side again finished bottom of the division in the 1914–15 season, but avoided relegation for a second time when the league was suspended due to the escalation of the First World War.
Once the competition resumed after the war Gillingham, once again wearing black and white, continued to fare poorly, again finishing bottom of Division One in the 1919–20 season.  For a third time, however, the club avoided relegation, due to the subsequent elevation of all Southern League Division One clubs to form the new Football League Third Division.
In the club's first match in the newly created Football League Division Three, Gillingham held Southampton to a 1–1 draw in front of a new record Priestfield crowd of 11,500, with Tom Gilbey scoring the club's first goal in league competition.  Under new manager John McMillan the team struggled and finished the 1920–21 season bottom of the table, and in the years to follow there was little improvement, with the club regularly finishing in the lower reaches of the bottom division.  Gillingham did not manage to finish in the top half of the table until 1925–26, when the team finished in 10th place, due mainly to the goals of Dick Edmed, who was promptly signed by Liverpool for a fee of £1,750, a new Gillingham record.  Manager Harry Curtis departed soon afterwards to take over at Brentford, and former Wolverhampton Wanderers manager Albert Hoskins stepped down a division to manage the club, but he could do little to change the team's fortunes and left in 1929 after Gillingham finished bottom of the table once again.Striker Fred Cheesmur set a new club record in the 1929–30 season when he scored six goals in a match against Merthyr Town.  This remains the highest number of goals scored by a Gillingham player in a professional match, but was a rare high point in a season which saw Gillingham forced to apply for re-election to the league.  The following year the club abandoned its traditional black and white striped shirts in favour of blue shirts and white shorts, colours which have remained associated with Gillingham ever since, although the black and white stripes are still visible in the current version of the club's badge.  In 1932–33 former Crystal Palace manager Fred Maven led the club to its highest league finish to date, finishing the season in 7th place, but it was a feat which could not be repeated and the team returned to struggling at the foot of the table the following season.
In the 1934–35 season centre-forward Sim Raleigh, the club's top scorer the previous season and a player seen as a future star, suffered a brain haemorrhage following a blow to the head in a match against Brighton & Hove Albion on 1 December.  Although he played on he collapsed during the second half and died in hospital later the same day.  The club launched a fund which raised over £250 for his widow and child.In 1938 the Gills finished bottom of the now-regionalised Third Division South once more, and were required to apply for re-election to the Football League for the fifth time since joining it in 1920.  This time the club's bid for re-election failed, with Ipswich Town registering 36 votes to Gillingham's 28 and being promoted into the League.  At the time it was considered a distinct possibility that Gillingham, saddled with heavy debts incurred during the preceding unsuccessful seasons, might not survive, but the club carried on, and returned to the Southern League the following season, albeit without manager Alan Ure, who was replaced by Bill Harvey.
The club's second stint in the Southern League was interrupted by the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939, which saw newly appointed manager Archie Clark and most of the players assigned to work at the local dockyards.  When competitive football resumed, Gillingham played in the first incarnation of the Kent League, winning the title in both 1944–45 and 1945–46.  In the second of these seasons the team also won the Kent Senior Cup, Kent County Challenge Cup and Kent League Cup, to complete a clean sweep of every senior trophy in the county. Following their Kent League triumphs, the Gills returned to the Southern League for the 1946–47 season, in which the team again won two trophies, claiming both the Southern League Cup and the Southern League title itself,  and registered a club record 12–1 victory over Gloucester City.  Striker Hughie Russell scored nine goals in the match, and missed out on double figures when he hit the bar late in the game.Although Gillingham missed out on the Southern League title the following season, finishing as runners-up, the team again captured the Kent Senior Cup, as well as setting a club record attendance of 23,002 for a cup match against Queens Park Rangers.  Gillingham applied for re-election to the Football League in the summer of 1948 but, despite producing a glossy brochure detailing the team's achievements, the club saw its application rejected, with only one vote cast in its favour.  Despite this disappointment, the team continued to perform strongly in the Southern League and successfully regained the league title in 1948–49.  In 1950 plans were announced to expand the Third Division South from 22 to 24 teams and, based on the team's local success in the interim, Gillingham gained re-election to the Football League, receiving the highest number of votes amongst the candidate clubs.
Gillingham's first game back in the Football League saw the Kent club hold fellow new entrants Colchester United to a 0–0 draw at Priestfield in front of 19,542 fans.  The 1950–51 season saw the Gills both concede and score nine goals in individual matches, and finished with them bottom of the table, a performance which was repeated the following season.  In 1952 striker Jimmy Scarth set a Football League record when he scored a hat-trick in approximately 2 minutes 30 seconds against Leyton Orient, which was officially recognised as the fastest hat-trick in the history of the Football League until February 2004.Gillingham's fortunes on the field gradually improved and the team finished in the top half of the Third Division South on three occasions, helped by the goals of Ernie Morgan, who in 1954–55 set a new club record by scoring 31 league goals.  In 1956–57 and 1957–58, however, the Gills found themselves once again rooted to the bottom of the table, and this meant that with the restructuring of the league system for the 1958–59 season, the team was placed in the newly created Fourth Division – a top-half finish would have led to placement in the new national Third Division.  1958 also saw the departure of long-serving manager Archie Clark, who had held the post since before the Second World War, with Harry Barratt taking over.
The Gills were still in the Fourth Division in 1962 when Barratt was replaced as manager by Freddie Cox, who inherited a team which had just finished 20th in the table.  Cox set about fashioning a new team noted for its formidable defensive capabilities. After finishing in 5th place in 1962–63 Gillingham went on to gain promotion the following year, winning the only championship in the club's history.  With goalkeeper John Simpson setting a new club record by conceding only 30 goals all season, the team finished level on 60 points with Carlisle United, but with a fractionally better goal average, and so claimed the championship in the tightest finish in Football League history.Gillingham initially performed well at the higher level, twice coming close to promotion, but performances then declined and the club was relegated back to the Fourth Division in 1970–71.  The Gills quickly bounced back, however, and were promoted back to the Third Division in 1973–74 under the management of Andy Nelson.  With the help of players such as Brian Yeo, who equalled Ernie Morgan's record for most league goals in a season with 31, Gillingham scored a club record total of 90 league goals and finished as runners-up to Peterborough United.
After guiding the club to promotion Andy Nelson left to take over as manager of Charlton Athletic and was replaced by Len Ashurst, but his managerial reign lasted only 16 months.  Gerry Summers took over and was to take the club the closest it had ever come to promotion to Division Two when, in 1978–79, Gillingham finished just one point off a promotion place,  but two years later Summers was replaced by Keith Peacock.  Peacock put together a team which developed a reputation for exciting, attacking play, and also brought through the ranks a number of young players who went on to achieve success at a higher level, including Micky Adams, Steve Bruce, and Tony Cascarino, who was famously bought from non-league Crockenhill in exchange for a set of tracksuits.  Gillingham came close to promotion several times during Peacock's reign, with four top-six finishes in six years, and in 1986–87 reached the play-offs (in their first year of existence) only to lose in the final to Swindon Town.  Deadlocked at 2–2 after the home and away legs of the final, the two teams had to play a third match at a neutral venue, which Swindon won 2–0.
The club's failure to gain promotion meant that it was unable to hang on to the ambitious Cascarino, who was sold to Millwall for £225,000, but despite the loss of the team's star striker the Gills' 1987–88 season began with a flurry of goals.  On consecutive Saturdays Gillingham beat Southend United 8–1 and Chesterfield 10–0 (the latter a new club record for a professional match), but the early-season promise faded and in December Peacock was controversially sacked after a 6–0 defeat to Aldershot.  His assistant, Paul Taylor, was promoted to manager, but after an unsuccessful spell in charge Taylor was himself replaced in October 1988 by former Tottenham Hotspur manager Keith Burkinshaw.  Burkinshaw was unable to turn the team's fortunes around, however, and departed shortly before the club's relegation to Division Four was confirmed at the end of the 1988–89 season.Former Gillingham player Damien Richardson became the club's next manager, with veteran goalkeeper Ron Hillyard as his assistant, but the club's financial situation was poor and the pair struggled to produce results with a squad composed of ageing journeymen and untried youngsters, and both men were sacked in September 1992, with Glenn Roeder taking over as manager.  Gillingham's league status was in jeopardy for most of the 1992–93 Division Three campaign, with relegation to the Football Conference a distinct possibility until the last home match of the season, when a 2–0 win over Halifax Town ensured the club's survival.  Nonetheless, the financial crisis continued at Priestfield, and steadily improving league form over the next two seasons did little to disguise the fact that the club was in real danger of going out of existence.The club eventually went into receivership in January 1995, and by the end of the 1994–95 season, with Gillingham facing the threat of being expelled from the Football League and closed down, fans were wondering whether they had seen the last ever Gills match.  However, help was on its way in the form of a last-ditch purchase of the club.
In June 1995 a London-based former office supplies salesman, Paul Scally, stepped in and bought the club for a nominal fee.  Scally brought in new manager Tony Pulis, who signed almost a complete new team and led Gillingham to promotion in his first season, finishing second in Division Three (now Football League Two).  This season was also notable for the fact that the team only conceded 20 league goals – a league record for a 46-game season.  In 1999 Gillingham reached the playoffs, but lost in the Second Division play-off final against Manchester City.  Following goals by the prolific partnership of Robert Taylor and Carl Asaba, the Gills led 2–0 with less than two minutes left, only to see Manchester City score twice, the equaliser in injury time, and then win a penalty shoot-out 3–1.Soon after the play-off loss, Pulis was sacked for gross misconduct, with Peter Taylor replacing him as manager.  In the 1999–00 season Gillingham went on a club record breaking FA Cup run, beating then-Premiership teams Bradford City and Sheffield Wednesday before losing 5–0 to Chelsea in the quarter-finals.  The team also finished in third place in the league and thus qualified for the play-offs again, facing Wigan Athletic at Wembley Stadium in the final.  The game finished 1–1 after 90 minutes but thanks to goals in extra time from Gillingham substitutes Steve Butler and Andy Thomson the club was promoted to the second tier of the English league (Division One) for the first time.  As Taylor had only signed a one-year deal, Leicester City, then in the Premiership, approached him to be their new manager.
Former team captain Andy Hessenthaler was appointed player-manager, having previously served as player-coach, and led the club to league finishes of 13th, 12th and 11th in his first three seasons in charge.  In contrast, the 2003–04 season saw the club escape relegation by the narrowest of margins, with a last day goalless draw keeping Gillingham above Walsall on goal difference, with just one goal separating the two teams.  John Gorman was appointed to help Hessenthaler as the side started the 2004–05 season poorly, but as the team continued to struggle at the wrong end of the table Hessenthaler resigned as manager in late November. Somewhat unusually he continued to be employed as a player.  Gorman succeeded Hessenthaler in a caretaker capacity but left the club to take the manager's job at Wycombe Wanderers.  Gillingham then appointed former Burnley boss Stan Ternent as manager, but despite a late run of positive results, he could not prevent the Gills' relegation to League One on the last day of the season.  In a reversal of the previous season's fortunes, Crewe Alexandra, the team immediately above Gillingham in the table, survived by just one goal.
The 2005–06 season started with Neale Cooper being appointed as the new manager, but despite achieving a 3–2 victory over Premiership side Portsmouth in the Football League Cup, the team struggled in the league, and shortly after defeat in the first round of the FA Cup by Northern Premier League side Burscough, Cooper resigned.  He was replaced by Ronnie Jepson, who led the team to a mid-table finish, which he repeated in 2006–07. After a poor start to the 2007–08 season Jepson resigned, and Mick Docherty and Iffy Onuora were appointed joint caretaker managers.  Docherty left the club a month later, but Onuora remained in charge until the appointment of Mark Stimson on 1 November 2007.  At the end of the 2007–08 season the club was relegated from League One.  The following season the Gills earned promotion through the play-offs after finishing fifth in the league, Simeon Jackson scoring the only goal in the final against Shrewsbury Town at Wembley Stadium.  In the 2009–10 season, however, the Gills were relegated back to League Two,
with Stimson leaving the club by mutual consent two days after the end of the season.  Within two weeks, Andy Hessenthaler returned for a second spell as manager.For two consecutive seasons the Gills finished just outside the play-off places in League Two, following which Hessenthaler was moved to the position of Director of Football and Martin Allen appointed as manager.  In the 2012–13 season, helped by a new club record of eleven away wins in a season, the club once again gained promotion back to League One, winning the League Two championship, only the second title the club had ever won at a professional level.  The following October, however, Allen was sacked after a poor start to the season and Peter Taylor was appointed manager for a second time. Taylor was sacked after fourteen months in the job, and his successor Justin Edinburgh lasted until January 2017.  Former Gillingham player Adrian Pennock returned as manager, but the team came close to relegation at the end of the 2016–17 season.  Pennock left the club by mutual consent in September 2017, and Steve Lovell, another former Gills player, took charge.

Ipswich Town F.C. is an English association football club based in Ipswich, Suffolk, which was formed in 1878. The side played amateur football until 1936 when the club turned professional and was elected into the Southern League. Ipswich Town were elected into Division Three of the Football League in place of Gillingham F.C. on 30 May 1938.
The club experienced league success during the early 1960s, winning the Football League Championship in 1961–62, one season after winning promotion from the Second Division. Two decades later, under the guidance of Bobby Robson, the club achieved success both in the FA Cup and in European competition, winning the UEFA Cup in 1981.
Ipswich Town have made a contribution to the history of the England national football team; both Robson and Sir Alf Ramsey moved on from Ipswich to manage England, presiding over the nation's best results in the World Cup: fourth place in 1990 and world champions in 1966.
The club was founded on 16 October 1878 as an amateur side known as Ipswich A.F.C., under the presidency of local MP Thomas Cobbold who had played football at Charterhouse School. George S Sherrington & J. M. Franks were elected joint Captains. Ipswich A.F.C.'s first match was a 6–1 home victory over Stoke Wanderers at the Broom Hill ground on 2 November 1878. This was followed by a 2–0 victory over Harwich in the club's first away match. Losing only one game in 17 in its second season, the club was able to build enough interest to enrol players for a second team. Ipswich recorded their biggest ever victory during the 1880–81 season, a 15–0 defeat of East Stamford with one player, John Knights, registering a treble hat trick; both achievements remain club records. The team moved to Portman Road, the current ground, in 1884, and would share, until 1936, the facilities with the East Suffolk Cricket Club who had played there since 1855. The Cobbold family involvement continued when, in 1885, Nathanael Fromanteel Cobbold was elected as a vice-president of the club. Following his sudden death the following year, the position was then held by his nephew John Dupuis Cobbold.The club won their first trophy in the 1886–87 season, triumphing 2–1 against a team representing Ipswich School in the final of the Suffolk Challenge Cup. In 1888 the club merged with Ipswich Rugby Club to form Ipswich Town F.C. In 1890, the club entered the qualifying rounds of the FA Cup for the first time and was knocked out in the final qualifying round by the 93rd Highlanders. The club experienced scant success in the Cup during the 1890s but won a number of local cup competitions, including the Suffolk Senior Cup and the Ipswich Charity Cup. Having received invitations to join from both the Southern League and the Norfolk & Suffolk League, Ipswich joined the latter in the 1899–1900 season, finishing fourth in their first league season. They were league runners-up in 1902–03. In 1903 they also entered a team into the new South East Anglian League and were its inaugural champions. They left the South East Anglian League in 1906, but continued playing in the Norfolk & Suffolk League.
In 1907, Ipswich became founder members of the Southern Amateur League. The club narrowly avoided relegation in many of the following seasons, and suffered a club record 15–1 defeat at the hands of the Corinthians at Portman Road on New Year's Day, 1910. The outbreak of the First World War and the commandeering of Portman Road by the Army curtailed the 1914–15 season and organised football did not return until the 1920–21 season. Just one year later, Ipswich Town became champions of the Southern Amateur League, clinching the title on the last day of the season. The club won the league a further three times, in 1929–30, 1932–33 and 1933–34, before becoming founder members of the Eastern Counties Football League at the end of the 1934–35 season.
In 1936, local businessman Leonard P. Thompson threatened to lead a breakaway from the amateur club to create an entirely separate professional club, Ipswich United. John Murray Cobbold, the club President, called together rival factions for a meeting at the Town Hall on 1 May 1936, at which it was agreed that Ipswich Town should turn professional. The club was unanimously elected to the Southern League for the 1936–37 season and former Irish international footballer Mick O'Brien was appointed as the club's first professional manager.The club's first professional game at Portman Road resulted in a 4–1 win against Tunbridge Wells Rangers and the club went on to win the Southern League in their debut season. O'Brien left after just one season following the death of his wife. Ipswich Town were managerless until 10 November 1936 when the club appointed Scott Duncan, who had left recently relegated Manchester United. He led Ipswich to third place in the 1937–38 season.Ipswich Town F.C. were elected to The Football League on 30 May 1938 by a margin of just two votes, at the expense of Gillingham F.C., initially playing in Division Three (South). The club's last competitive match before the league was suspended due to the Second World War was a 1–1 draw with local rivals, Norwich City. Both John Murray Cobbold and director Robert Nevill Cobbold were killed during the war, the position of director being filled by John Cavendish Cobbold in 1948. Despite the interruption due to the war, Duncan managed the club for over 500 games between 1937 and 1955. Following three successive top-eight finishes, the 1949–50 season ended with Ipswich in 17th position in Division Three (South), the club's lowest ever league finish.
During the early 1950s striker Tom Garneys finished as club top-scorer for four seasons in a row, and became the first professional Ipswich player to score four times in a game. During this period, Ipswich won the title and promotion to the Second Division in the 1953–54 season, during which eight consecutive wins were recorded. The club was relegated back to Division Three (South) the following year at the end of a poor season, the highlight of which was progress to the fifth round of the FA Cup, a run ended by First Division Preston North End. Duncan resigned but stayed on at the club in a secretarial role for a further three years. His replacement was a managerial novice, former England international and double Championship winner at Tottenham Hotspur, Alf Ramsey.
Alf Ramsey's appointment led Billy Wright to comment, "In appointing Alf to become their manager Ipswich Town paid a tremendous tribute to intelligent football – and footballers who think!" In Ramsey's first season at the club, Ipswich scored 106 goals in 46 games and finished third in Division Three (South). The following season, 1956–57, the club won the Division Three (South) title for the second time and saw the emergence of local striker Ted Phillips who scored 46 times during the season; this remains the highest number of goals scored by an Ipswich player in a season. During the same season, Ipswich played under floodlights for the first time, at Coventry City in September 1956. At the end of that season that John Cavendish Cobbold was appointed as the club's Chairman. Three seasons of mid-table finishes followed as Ipswich established themselves in Division Two, along with moderate success in the FA Cup, most notably reaching the fifth round in the 1958–59 season.Ipswich had their most successful season to that point in 1960–61, winning the Second Division and promotion to the top level of English football, ahead of Sheffield United and Liverpool. In the top flight, Ipswich became champions of the Football League at the first attempt in 1961–62, with Ray Crawford joint English and European top scorer with Derek Kevan of West Bromwich Albion. Matt Busby described the title-winners as "... one of the First Division's most attractive sides ...". As English league champions, Ipswich qualified for European football for the first time. They met Maltese side Floriana in the European Cup, defeating them 14–1 on aggregate in the first round before losing to A.C. Milan in the second round; it would be another 11 years before the club would qualify for Europe again. Ramsey quit the club in April 1963 to take charge of the England national football team, and Ipswich finished only four places above relegation in the 1962–63 season. To commemorate Ramsey's success at the club, a statue of him was unveiled outside Portman Road in 2000 by Ray Crawford.Ramsey was replaced by Jackie Milburn, under whose leadership fortunes on the pitch declined. Two years after winning the league title, Ipswich dropped into the Second Division in 1963–64, conceding 121 league goals in 42 games, still the highest number of goals conceded by Ipswich in a season. Patrick Mark Cobbold, John's brother, joined the board of directors in 1964 and their mother, Lady Blanche Cobbold, became honorary president of the club. Milburn quit after just one full season and was replaced by Bill McGarry early in the 1964–65 season. The club remained in the Second Division for four years until McGarry guided Ipswich to promotion in the 1967–68 season, winning the division by a single point ahead of Queens Park Rangers. McGarry left to manage Wolves and was replaced by Bobby Robson in January 1969.
Bobby Robson's appointment followed a chance encounter with Ipswich director Murray Sangster while scouting at Portman Road for Chelsea manager Dave Sexton. Robson had some experience of management from his time at Fulham, although he had been sacked after failing to avoid relegation from Division Two. Robson's sides finished 18th and 19th in his first two seasons at Ipswich, but he kept the team in the top division, before finding greater success. Robson led the club to fourth place in the First Division and success in the Texaco Cup, beating local rivals Norwich City 4–2, in the 1972–73 season.The fourth-place finish meant Ipswich qualified for the 1973–74 UEFA Cup. In the first round, they were drawn against six-time European champions Real Madrid. Following a 1–0 victory at Portman Road, Ipswich needed to defend their slim lead. Ipswich captain Mick Mills was reported in the Spanish press suggesting that "El Real no es invincible" ("Real are not invincible") and a 0–0 draw at the Bernabéu secured Ipswich's shock passage into the second round. The club fell at the quarter final stage but fourth place in the league enabled Ipswich to return to the tournament in the following season.In the 1974–75 season, Ipswich finished third in the First Division and were losing semi-finalists in the FA Cup. Suffering from cancer and becoming less able to carry out his duties as Chairman, John Cobbold swapped roles with director Patrick Cobbold in 1976. In the 1975–76 season Ipswich finished sixth of the league, and in October 1976, they signed Paul Mariner from Plymouth for a club record £220,000. The team challenged Liverpool for the First Division title for much of the 1976–77 season, going top of the table in February 1977 with a 5–0 defeat of Norwich City in the East Anglian derby. Mariner's efforts helped the club to a third place finish, and the following season, he scored seven goals in the FA Cup as the club won the second major honour in its history, Roger Osborne scoring the winning goal in a 1–0 victory over Arsenal in the FA Cup Final at Wembley Stadium. The club's league fortunes dipped dramatically during the season finishing 18th, just three points above the relegation places, but the team reached the third round of the UEFA Cup, where they beat Barcelona 3–0 at Portman Road; Barcelona won the second leg 3–0, Johan Cruyff scoring twice, and Ipswich went out on penalties. The team's FA Cup success secured qualification for the 1978–79 European Cup Winners' Cup, where they reached the quarter-finals, again losing to Barcelona. Over the next two seasons Robson brought Dutchmen Arnold Mühren and Frans Thijssen to the club while the team achieved two further top six finishes in the First Division. However, it was the 1980–81 season which, in Robson's words, "... helped put Ipswich on the map ...".
The club finished second in the league once more and were losing semi-finalists in the FA Cup, but the real success of the season was victory in the UEFA Cup. Beating Michel Platini's AS Saint-Étienne 4–1 at the Stade Geoffroy-Guichard in the quarter-finals and a 2–0 aggregate victory over 1. FC Köln in the semi-final led Ipswich to the club's first European final, played over two legs against AZ 67 Alkmaar. A 3–0 victory at Portman Road was followed by a 4–2 defeat at the Olympic Stadium in Amsterdam, resulting in a 5–4 aggregate victory over the Dutch side.Ipswich therefore began the 1981–82 UEFA Cup campaign as holders, but lost in the first round to Scottish opponents Aberdeen. Domestically, the club had continued success, finishing second in the First Division yet again, this time four points behind Liverpool.Robson's achievements with Ipswich earned him an offer from the Football Association to become the England national coach; he declined an offer of a ten-year contract extension from Ipswich director Patrick Cobbold. On 7 July 1982, two days after England were knocked out of the 1982 World Cup, Bobby Robson left Ipswich to succeed Ron Greenwood as coach of England. During his 13-year tenure at Ipswich, Robson brought in only 14 players from other clubs, relying instead on players developed through the club's youth programmes. In 2002, in recognition of Robson's achievements with the club, a life-size statue of him was unveiled opposite the Cobbold Stand at Portman Road. On 7 July 2006, Robson was named as honorary president of Ipswich Town Football Club, the first since Lady Blanche Cobbold who had died in 1987.
Bobby Robson was replaced at Ipswich by his chief coach, Bobby Ferguson. Ferguson made the transition from coach to manager in July 1982, but some success in the various cup competitions was offset by an end to the high league positions the club had enjoyed under Robson. In the three seasons from 1982–83 to 1984–85, Ipswich reached the FA Cup quarter-final and League Cup semi-final in 1985, but declined in the league, finishing 9th, 12th and 17th. In the following season, the team's league form was even poorer, resulting in a 20th-place finish and relegation to the Second Division. Ipswich finished fifth in the Second Division in the 1986–87 season to qualify for the play-offs, but Ferguson resigned after losing to 2–1 on aggregate to Charlton Athletic.
From 1987 to 1990, Ipswich Town were managed by John Duncan, but achieved only mid-table finishes each season with the club gaining a reputation as a "competent Second Division side". Duncan was sacked in June 1990 and was replaced by John Lyall, whose 14-year reign as West Ham United manager had ended the previous summer. During that time the Hammers had won the FA Cup twice and finished third in the league. Lyall guided Ipswich to a mid-table finish in the 1990–91 season but a considerable improvement the following season led to winning the Second Division championship. The team was promoted to join the inaugural season of the FA Premier League.After a good start to the season, Ipswich were in fourth place in the league in January 1993, but a dip in form during the final weeks of the season saw the club finish 16th. The next season was almost a mirror of the previous; Ipswich again made a good start, followed by a late slump in results. The club only avoided relegation when Sheffield United suffered a last-gasp 3–2 defeat at Chelsea on the final day of the season. Lyall was sacked as Ipswich manager in December 1994 with the club at the bottom of the Premiership. His successor George Burley was unable to turn things around and Ipswich suffered a "humiliating" 9–0 defeat at Manchester United in early March, the biggest margin in a Premiership match. Relegation was confirmed soon afterwards and Ipswich ended the season having conceded 93 goals in 42 league games. Patrick Cobbold had left his role as club Chairman in 1991, handing his position to John Kerr. His brother had died in 1983 and Patrick died suddenly in 1994, but the Cobbold connection continued when Patrick and John's nephew Major Philip William Hope-Cobbold joined the board in 1995.
Having served on the board of directors since 1986, David Sheepshanks was appointed as club Chairman in 1995. The next four seasons brought near-misses as the club flirted with promotion; in 1995–96, Ipswich fell one place short of the First Division play-off zone, and the ensuing three seasons brought successive semi-final play-off defeats. In 2000, Ipswich qualified for the Division One play-off final, the last such match at Wembley Stadium before the stadium was to be redeveloped. They beat Barnsley 4–2 securing their return to the Premiership after an absence of five years.Ipswich made only one major signing during the off-season, buying Hermann Hreiðarsson from Wimbledon F.C. for a club record £4m two days before the season commenced. Television pundits Rodney Marsh and Mark Lawrenson both agreed relegation would be the obvious outcome. Ipswich surprised the doubters; they sustained a high league position and narrowly missed out on qualification for the UEFA Champions League, when the team failed to win on the last day of the season against Derby County. The fifth-place finish gained the club a UEFA Cup place and earned George Burley the title of FA Premier League Manager of the Year, an award that until 2010 had, in every other season, been given to the manager of the Premier League champions.Matteo Sereni and Finidi George arrived before the 2001–02 season to boost the squad for its foray into Europe. The club's league form was poor, and 18 games into the campaign, Ipswich were bottom of the table with just one league victory. However, there was some relief in the UEFA Cup with a victory over Inter Milan 1–0 at home in the third round, despite which the tie was lost over two legs after a 4–1 defeat at the San Siro. From bottom of the table at Christmas, a run of seven wins from eight fixtures appeared to have secured the team's league status, but another decline set in and relegation was confirmed on the final day of the season with a 5–0 defeat by Liverpool at Anfield. The loss of income due to relegation to the Championship contributed to the club going into financial administration, resulting in the sale of a number of players including Jamie Clapham, Darren Ambrose, and club captain Matt Holland. Ipswich had the consolation of again qualifying for the UEFA Cup, through UEFA's Fair Play system, losing in the second round to Czech side Slovan Liberec. A poor start to the domestic season, leaving the club 19th in the table by mid-October, resulted in George Burley being sacked after nearly eight years as manager.First team coach Tony Mowbray was in charge for four games as caretaker manager, winning once, but he was replaced as manager by the permanent appointment of former Oldham Athletic, Everton and Manchester City manager Joe Royle, whose managerial career had previously yielded four promotions and one FA Cup victory; as a player, he had been named player of the year in his only full season at Ipswich's local rivals Norwich City.
When Royle became Ipswich manager, the club was struggling near the Division One relegation zone, but the change in management sparked a revival and Ipswich narrowly failed to reach the 2002–03 play-offs. The club came out of administration during the 2003–04 season, and continued to challenge for promotion back to the Premier League. Ipswich finished that season in fifth place, but were beaten in the play-off semi finals by West Ham United 2–1 on aggregate. Ipswich missed automatic promotion in the 2004–05 season, finishing third, only two points behind second-placed Wigan Athletic. Again, they lost to West Ham United in the play off semi-finals, this time by a 4–2 aggregate score. Although they had been pre-season promotion favourites for the 2005–06 season, Ipswich finished 15th, the club's lowest finish since 1966, and Joe Royle resigned on 11 May 2006.At a press conference held on 5 June 2006, Jim Magilton was officially named as the new manager and former academy director Bryan Klug was appointed as first team coach. In Magilton's first season, the club reached a final placing of 14th place in the table. That year, Ipswich became the first carbon neutral football club in England following a collaboration between the fans and the club's main sponsor E.ON. In October 2007, Ipswich agreed to sell a £44m stake in the club to British businessman Marcus Evans who became the majority owner and shareholder. 2007–08 brought further progress for Magilton and his side, who finished eighth in the final table. Magilton's team failed to gain promotion or reach the play-offs in the 2008–09 season, and on 22 April 2009 Magilton was sacked. His successor, Roy Keane, was appointed as manager the following day. Sheepshanks stood down as chairman after 14 years on 20 May 2009.  Ipswich started the 2009–10 season winless in the league after 14 games and bottom of the Championship, their worst ever start to a league season.  Limited success throughout the year saw the club finish 15th in Keane's first full season at the club.  Keane's second season at the club started well but by the start of 2011, the club were 19th in the Championship, and he left the club on 7 January 2011.  First team coach Ian McParland stood in as caretaker manager for two matches, including a semi-final first leg win in the League Cup against Arsenal, before Paul Jewell took the role on permanently in mid-January 2011.  Ipswich finished 13th that season, and 15th the following, Jewell's first full season at the club. The longest-serving members of the Championship, Ipswich were bottom of the league by late October, and Jewell left the club by "mutual consent", leaving Chris Hutchings in a caretaker role. After a single match, Hutchings was replaced by Mick McCarthy on a full-time basis. McCarthy led Ipswich to finish in 14th position that season, and 9th in the following season.  Despite losing their final match of the 2014–15 season, Ipswich finished in sixth place and secured a play-off place where they played their local rivals Norwich City, losing 4–1 on aggregate.  The following season Ipswich finished just outside the playoff places, in seventh place.  The 2016–17 season saw Ipswich finish 16th, their lowest finish since the 1958–59 season.  On 29 March 2018, the club announced that Mick McCarthy's contract, which was due to expire at the end of the 2017–18 season, would not be extended.  McCarthy announced that he was quitting during the post-match press conference following a 1–0 victory over Barnsley on 10 April 2018.  He was replaced until the end of the season by Bryan Klug as a caretaker manager.
Paul Hurst was appointed as manager for the start of the 2018–19 season, with the club heralding it as "a new era", but was sacked less than five months later after securing a single victory in fourteen league matches, leaving Ipswich bottom of the Championship.  On 27 October 2018, former Norwich City manager Paul Lambert was appointed as the new manager.

The history of Lithuania between 1219 and 1295 concerns the establishment and early history of the first Lithuanian state, the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. The beginning of the 13th century marks the end of the prehistory of Lithuania. From this point on the history of Lithuania is recorded in chronicles, treaties, and other written documents. In 1219, 21 Lithuanian dukes signed a peace treaty with Galicia–Volhynia. This event is widely accepted as the first proof that the Baltic tribes were uniting and consolidating. Despite continuous warfare with two Christian orders, the Livonian Order and the Teutonic Knights, the Grand Duchy of Lithuania was established and gained some control over the lands of Black Ruthenia, Polatsk, Minsk, and other territories east of modern-day Lithuania that had become weak and vulnerable after the collapse of Kievan Rus'.
The first ruler to hold the title of Grand Duke was Mindaugas. Traditionally he is considered the founder of the state, the one who united the Baltic tribes and established the Duchy. Some scholars, however, challenge this perception, arguing that an organized state existed before Mindaugas, possibly as early as 1183. After quelling an internal war with his nephews, Mindaugas was baptized in 1251, and was crowned as King of Lithuania in 1253. In 1261, he broke the peace with the Livonian Order, perhaps even renouncing Christianity. His assassination in 1263 by Treniota ended the early Christian kingdom in Lithuania. For another 120 years Lithuania would remain a pagan empire, fighting against the Teutonic and Livonian Orders during the Northern Crusades during their attempts to Christianize the land.After Mindaugas' death, the Grand Duchy of Lithuania entered times of relative instability, as reflected by the fact that seven Grand Dukes held the title over the course of the next 32 years. Little is known about this period, but the Gediminid dynasty was founded in about 1280. Despite the instability, the Grand Duchy did not disintegrate. Vytenis assumed power in 1295, and during the next 20 years laid solid foundations for the Duchy to expand and grow under the leadership of Gediminas and his son Algirdas. While the Grand Duchy was established between 1219 and 1295, the years after 1295 marked its expansion.
The Balts were largely driven to unite by external threats from aggressive German religious orders. In 1202, the Order of the Livonian Brothers of the Sword was established by Albert, the Bishop of Riga, to promote the Christianization and conquest of the Livonians, Curonians, Semigallians, and Estonians near the Gulf of Riga. The Order waged a number of successful campaigns and posed a great danger to the Lithuanian territories. The Order's progress was halted by its defeat at the Battle of Saule in 1236, after which it almost collapsed. The following year, it merged into the Teutonic Knights.In 1226, Konrad I of Masovia invited the Teutonic Knights to defend his borders and subdue the Prussians, offering the Knights the use of Chełmno (Kulm) as a base for their campaign. In 1230, they settled in Chełmno, built a castle, and began attacking Prussian lands. After 44 years, and despite two Prussian uprisings against them, they had conquered most of the Prussian tribes. Afterwards, the Knights spent nine years conquering the Nadruvians, Skalvians, and Yotvingians, and from 1283, they were better positioned to threaten the young Lithuanian state from the west.
Further unification of the Lithuanian tribes was facilitated by the social changes that took place in Lithuania during this period. Private land ownership was established (allodiums, Lithuanian: atolai), which would later evolve into a feudal system. As attested by many chronicles, it was the principal form of organization governing land ownership in the 13th century. Under this system, known in England as primogeniture, only the eldest son could inherit lands, which allowed dukes to consolidate their holdings. Social classes and divisions of labor also began taking shape. There were classes of experienced soldiers (bajoras), of free peasants (laukininkas), and of "unfree" people (kaimynas and šeimynykštis). In order to enforce this social structure, a united state was needed. Another force behind unification was the desire to take advantage of Ruthenian lands, which were suffering from the Mongol invasion. Temporary alliances among Lithuanian dukes often sufficed for military ventures into, and plundering of, these lands (including Pskov, plundered in 1213). Altogether, between 1201 and 1236, Lithuanians launched at least 22 incursions into Livonia, 14 into Rus, and 4 into Poland. The ongoing administration of conquered territories, however, required a strong and unified central power.
Some evidence suggests that Lithuanians began combining their forces at the dawn of the 13th century. For example, in 1207, soldiers were recruited across Lithuania to fight the German religious orders, and in 1212, Daugirutis' treaty with Novgorod shows that he exerted some degree of influence over a vast area. During the first twenty years of the 13th century, Lithuanians organized some thirty military expeditions to Livonia, Russia, and Poland. Historian Tomas Baranauskas argues that a Lithuanian state could be said to exist as early as 1183.However, the first conclusive evidence that the Balts were uniting is considered to be the treaty with Galicia–Volhynia signed in 1219. The treaty's signatories include 21 Lithuanian dukes; it specifies that five of those were elder and thus took precedence over the remaining sixteen. Presumably, the eldest Duke was Živinbudas, since his name was mentioned first. Mindaugas, despite his youth, and his brother Dausprungas, are listed among the elder dukes. That would imply that they inherited their titles. The remaining two elder dukes were Daujotas (mentioned second) and his brother Vilikaila (mentioned last of the five).
The treaty is important for several reasons. It shows that the Lithuanian Dukes were co-operating; the signatories include Dukes who ruled lands such as Samogitia, which probably had no contact with Galicia–Volhynia. Their participation implies a perception of common interest, an indication of a nascent state. However, the designation of five Dukes as "elder" shows that the process of unification was still in transition. The inclusion of 21 Dukes indicates that the various lands in Lithuania were powerful and semi-independent. Historians consider the treaty an interesting documentation of the long and complex process of a state's formation. The progress of unification was uneven; for example, after the deaths of Dukes Daugirutis in 1213 and Stekšys in 1214, fewer raids were organized by Lithuanians.
Mindaugas, the duke who governed southern Lithuania between the Neman and Neris Rivers, eventually became the founder of the state. Mindaugas is referred to as the ruler of all Lithuania in the Livonian Rhymed Chronicle in 1236. The means by which he managed to acquire this title are not well known. Russian chronicles mention that he murdered or expelled various other dukes, including his relatives.
In 1236, Duke Vykintas led the Samogitian forces to victory in the Battle of Saule, where the Livonian Order suffered a catastrophic defeat. It seems that Vykintas did not receive support from Mindaugas. Vykintas' personal power grew. The Livonian Order was on the brink of collapse and was forced to become a branch of the Teutonic Knights. The combined Orders focused on the conquest of Samogitia, since only this land prevented them from consolidating their territories. The union of these aggressive powers could not have passed without notice in Lithuanian lands, and might have furthered the unification process. In about 1239 Mindaugas took over the weakened Black Ruthenia and appointed his son Vaišvilkas to govern it. During the early 1240s, Mindaugas strengthened and established his power in various Baltic lands. In 1245, Mindaugas sent his nephews Tautvilas and Edivydas, the sons of Dausprungas and Vykintas, to conquer Smolensk, but they were unsuccessful. In 1249, an internal war erupted as Mindaugas sought to seize his nephews' and Vykintas' lands.Tautvilas, Edivydas, and Vykintas formed a powerful coalition with the Samogitians, the Livonian Order, Daniel of Galicia (Tautvilas and Edivydas' brother-in-law), and Vasilko of Volhynia in opposition to Mindaugas. Only Poles, invited by Daniel, declined to take part in the coalition against the Lithuanians. The dukes of Galicia and Volhynia managed to gain control over Black Ruthenia, an area ruled by Mindaugas' son Vaišvilkas. Tautvilas traveled to Riga, where he was baptized by the Archbishop. In 1250, the Order organized two major raids, one against Nalša land and the other against the domains of Mindaugas and those parts of Samogitia that still supported him.
Attacked from the north and south and facing the possibility of unrest elsewhere, Mindaugas was placed in an extremely difficult position, but managed to use the conflicts between the Livonian Order and the Archbishop of Riga in his own interests. He succeeded in bribing Andreas von Stierland, the master of the Order, who was still angry at Vykintas for the defeat in 1236. In 1251, Mindaugas agreed to receive baptism and relinquish control over some lands in western Lithuania, for which he was to receive a crown in return. In 1252, Tautvilas and his remaining allies attacked Mindaugas in Voruta, sometimes considered to be the first capital of Lithuania. The attack failed and Tautvilas' forces retreated to defend themselves in Tverai Castle, in the present-day Rietavas municipality. Vykintas died in or about 1253, and Tautvilas was forced to rejoin Daniel of Galicia. Daniel reconciled with Mindaugas in 1254; the Black Ruthenian lands were transferred to Roman, the son of Daniel. Vaišvilkas, the son of Mindaugas, decided to join a monastery. Tautvilas recognized Mindaugas' superiority and received Polatsk as a fiefdom.
As promised, Mindaugas and his wife Morta were crowned at some time during the summer of 1253, and the Kingdom of Lithuania, proclaimed by the pope in 1251, was soundly established. 6 July is now celebrated as "Statehood Day" (Lithuanian: Valstybės diena); it is an official holiday in modern Lithuania. However, the exact date of the coronation is not known; the scholarship of historian Edvardas Gudavičius, who promulgated this date, is sometimes challenged. The location of the coronation also remains unknown.
Pope Innocent IV supported Mindaugas, hoping that a new Christian state could stem the inroads being made by the Golden Horde, a state of the Mongol Empire. On 17 July 1251, the pope signed two crucial papal bulls. One of them ordered the Bishop of Chełmno to crown Mindaugas as King of Lithuania, appoint a bishop for Lithuania, and to build a cathedral. The other bull specified that the new bishop was to be directly subordinate to the pope. This was a welcome development to the Lithuanians, since they were concerned that their long-standing antagonists, the Livonian Order, would exert too much control over the new state.It took some time before a Bishop of Lithuania was appointed because of various conflicts of interest. The Bishop of Gniezno appointed Vito (Lithuanian: Vitas), a monk of the Dominican Order, to this position, but he was not recognized by Mindaugas or accepted by the populace. The activities of Vito in Lithuania are unknown, although he is sometimes associated with Mindaugas' Cathedral. Finally, in 1254, Christian (Lithuanian: Kristijonas) from the Livonian Order was appointed. Mindaugas endowed him with some lands in Samogitia, but not much is known about his activities. Historical sources do not mention any sponsorship of missionaries, education of priests, or construction of churches during that time, and Bishop Christian went back to Germany in 1259, where he died in 1271. The establishment of Mindaugas' Cathedral remains problematic, but recent archeological research found the remains of a 13th-century brick building on the site of the present-day Vilnius Cathedral. The general assumption is that the remains are those of Mindaugas Cathedral, built to satisfy the agreement with the pope. However, as later events showed, Lithuanians resisted Christianization, and Mindaugas' baptism had only a temporary impact on further developments.Immediately after his coronation, Mindaugas transferred some western lands to the Livonian Order – portions of Samogitia, Nadruva, and Dainava. There is some discussion as to whether in later years (1255, 1257, 1259, 1261) Mindaugas gave even more lands to the Order. The deeds might have been falsified by the Order; the case for this scenario is bolstered by the fact that some of the documents mention lands that were not actually under the control of Mindaugas. Whatever the case, relative peace and stability was established for about eight more years. Mindaugas used this opportunity to concentrate on expansion to the east. He strengthened his influence in Black Ruthenia, in Pinsk, and took advantage of the collapsed Kievan Rus' by conquering Polatsk, a major center of commerce in the Daugava River basin. He also negotiated a peace with Galicia–Volhynia, and married a daughter to Svarn, the son of Daniel of Galicia, who would later become Grand Duke of Lithuania. Diplomatic relations with western Europe and the Holy See were also reinforced. In 1255, Mindaugas received permission from Pope Alexander IV to crown his son as King of Lithuania. In the domestic arena, Mindaugas strove to establish state institutions: his own noble court, administrative systems, a diplomatic service, and a monetary system. Silver Lithuanian long currency (Lithuanian: Lietuvos ilgieji) circulated, providing an indice of statehood.
The Livonian Order used this period to consolidate their control over Samogitian lands. They built three castles along the border: Memelburg (Klaipėda), Georgenburg (Jurbarkas), and Doben (Durbe in Latvia). The Samogitians responded by electing Algminas as their war leader, and attacked Courland, as the Order had limited battlefield successes. In 1259, the Livonian Order lost the Battle of Skuodas, and in 1260, it lost the Battle of Durbe. The first loss encouraged a rebellion by the Semigalians, and the later loss spurred the Prussians into an uprising against the Order. The Great Prussian Uprising lasted for 14 years. Encouraged by Treniota, his nephew, Mindaugas broke peace with the Order. Some chronicles hint that he also returned to his former pagan beliefs, but this is disputable. Nevertheless, all the diplomatic achievements made since his coronation were lost.Mindaugas then formed an alliance with Alexander Nevsky of Novgorod and marched against the Order. Treniota led an army to Cēsis and battled Masovia, hoping to encourage all the conquered Baltic tribes to rise up against the Orders and unite under Lithuanian leadership. He waged successful battles, but did not manage to capture the fortified castles or spark a coalition of Baltic forces against the Order. His personal influence grew because Mindaugas was concentrating on the conquest of Russian lands, dispatching a large army to Bryansk. Treniota and Mindaugas began to pursue different priorities. In the midst of these events, Mindaugas' wife Morta died, and Mindaugas expressed the wish to marry Daumantas' wife. Daumantas and Treniota responded to this insult by assassinating Mindaugas and two of his sons, Ruklys and Rupeikis, in 1263. Lithuania lapsed into years of internal instability.
After Mindaugas' death, the state did not disintegrate and Treniota took over the title of Grand Duke. However, his power was fragile; he was challenged by Tautvilas, who had not forgotten his own claims to power. Tautvilas was also assassinated by Treniota. However, just a year later, in 1264, Treniota was killed by Mindaugas' former servants. Mindaugas' son Vaišvilkas and brother-in-law Shvarn from Volhynia took over the control in Lithuania. Daumantas was forced to flee to Pskov, was baptized Timofei, ruled successfully from 1266 to 1299 and even became a saint. In 1265 Vaišvilkas, as a Christian, reconciled with the Livonian Order and, without support from Lithuania, the rebellions among the Balts that had been fueled by Treniota began to subside. In 1267 he returned to a monastic life and transferred the Grand Duchy to Shvarn.
Little is known about Shvarn and his rule, but historians believe he was unable to take control of all Lithuania, and ruled only over its southern portions. He died in 1269 or 1271 in Galicia.
The circumstances surrounding the advance to power in 1269 of the next ruler, Traidenis, are not clear. From the outset his relationships with Galicia–Volhynia were tense and eventually resulted in the 1274–1276 war. Traidenis was successful in battle, and his control over Black Ruthenia was strengthened. Traidenis, known for his strong anti-German attitude, was also successful in fighting with the Livonian Order. In 1270 he won the Battle of Karuse, fought on ice near Saaremaa. However, in 1272 the Order retaliated, attacking Semigalia and building Dünaburg (Daugavpils) Castle in 1273 on lands nominally controlled by Traidenis. Several years later, in 1281, Traidenis conquered Jersika Castle in the present-day Preiļi District, and was able to exchange it for the Dünaburg Castle. Dünaburg remained a Lithuanian outpost until 1313. In 1279 the Order attacked Lithuanian lands, reaching as far as Kernavė, but on their way back they suffered a major defeat in the Battle of Aizkraukle. The Order's master, Ernst von Rassburg, died in the battle, and the conquered Semigallians rebelled. The Semigallians were now willing to acknowledge Lithuania's superiority and asked Traidenis for assistance. However, Traidenis died soon afterwards, and the rebellion was not successful.
Traidenis' reign was the longest and most stable regime during the period of unrest. After his death the Orders finalized their conquests: the conquered Baltic tribes did not rebel again and the Orders could now concentrate on Lithuania. In 1274 the Great Prussian Rebellion ended, and the Teutonic Knights proceeded to conquer other Baltic tribes: the Nadruvians and Skalvians in 1274–1277, and the Yotvingians in 1283; the Livonian Order completed its conquest of Semigalia, the last Baltic ally of Lithuania, in 1291. The Orders could now turn their full attention to Lithuania. The "buffer zone" composed of other Baltic tribes had disappeared, and Lithuania was left to battle the Orders on its own.
There is considerable uncertainty about the identities of the Grand Dukes of Lithuania between Traidenis' death in 1282 and Vytenis' assumption of power in 1295. This is in part because the two main sources for Lithuanian history in the 13th century, the Hypatian Codex and the Livonian Rhymed Chronicle, end in the early 1290s. In 1285, one chronicle mentions Daumantas as Grand Duke. He attacked the Bishop of Tver and was severely wounded or even killed in the battle. However, that is the only information about him.
The Gediminid dynasty began its ascent in Lithuania during this time with the emergence of its first leader, Butigeidis. In 1289, leading about 8,000 troops, he attacked Sambia. In 1289 the Teutonic Knights built a castle in present-day Sovetsk (Tilsit) and their raids intensified. Butigeidis was the first to build strong castles along the Neman River. He died in 1290 or 1292, and his brother Butvydas (also known as Pukuveras) inherited the crown. Butvydas was the father of Vytenis and probably of Gediminas. During his short reign Butvydas tried to defend the duchy against the Teutonic Knights; he also attacked Masovia, an ally of the knights. His son, Vytenis, advanced to power in 1295 and ended the period of relative instability. His reign marks the transition from the state's establishment to the point at which it was poised for expansion.
The state united and ruled by Mindaugas constituted the first Lithuanian state. The state effectively protected Lithuanians and Samogitians from assimilation induced by the Teutonic Knights and the Livonian Order, the destiny of Prussians, Skalvians, Curonians, Selonians and other Baltic tribes. Mindaugas ruled about 100,000 km2 (39,000 sq mi) of Lithuanian ethnic territory, an area with an estimated population of 300,000. The Slavic lands under his control and influence occupied another 100,000 km2 (39,000 sq mi). By about 1430, at its peak during the reign of Vytautas the Great, the Grand Duchy controlled some 930,000 km2 (360,000 sq mi) and almost 2.5 million people.The period from 1219 to 1295 also shaped future conflicts: the pagan Lithuanians were surrounded by the aggressive Roman Catholic Orders to its north and southwest, and by adherents of the Orthodox Church in the east. The Catholic Orders' raids intensified after they overcame the "buffer zone" created by Prussians, Nadruvians, Skalvians, Yotvingians, and Semigalians by 1283. The Lithuanian relationships with the Orthodox Church were more peaceful. The people were allowed to practise their religion; Lithuanian dukes did not hesitate to marry daughters of Orthodox dukes; at least some of the dukes' scribes must have been Orthodox as well. Struggles with the Teutonic Knights and expansion to the east were characteristic of the years from 1295 to 1377. It was inevitable that Lithuania could not endure religious, political, and cultural isolation forever and would have to choose either Roman Catholicism or Eastern Orthodoxy. In 1386, Grand Duke Jogaila elected baptism in the Catholic rite to marry Jadwiga of Poland and become King of Poland; the last pagan state in Europe was converted to Christianity.

The history of Liverpool Football Club from 1892 to 1959 covers the period from the club's foundation, through their first period of success from 1900 to the 1920s, to the appointment of Bill Shankly as manager.
Liverpool Football Club was formed on 15 March 1892 following a disagreement between the directors of Everton Football Club and its president, John Houlding, who owned the club's ground, Anfield. A dispute over rent resulted in Everton moving to Goodison Park, which left Houlding with an empty stadium. Thus, he founded Liverpool F.C., and they joined the Lancashire League. After winning the league title in their first season, Liverpool were accepted into the Football League for the 1893–94 season, following the resignations of Accrington and Bootle.
The appointment of Tom Watson as the club's manager in 1896 led to the club's first period of sustained success. Liverpool consolidated their position in the Football League following promotion to the First Division, and won their first League championship in 1901. A further championship followed in 1906, and in 1914 the club reached their first FA Cup final, losing to Burnley. Watson died suddenly in 1915 of pneumonia after the outbreak of the First World War. The club won two further championships in 1922 and 1923 when football resumed after the war.
An expansion to the Spion Kop terracing in the 1920s increased Anfield's capacity. Liverpool's fortunes declined during the inter-war years, when the club often finished in midtable. Liverpool became League champions again in 1947, in the first season after the Second World War, but following a slow downturn in performance the club was relegated to the Second Division in 1954. By the time of Shankly's appointment in 1959, Liverpool had been in the Second Division for five seasons.
Liverpool's origins lie with their neighbours Everton. Founded in 1878, Everton moved to Anfield in 1884, a facility owned by the club's president, John Houlding, a former Lord Mayor of Liverpool. In 1892 a dispute arose between Houlding and the Everton board of directors, over the club's tenancy of the ground. The annual rent had risen from £100 in 1884 to £250 in 1892; Houlding wanted to sell the ground to the club, which in turn wished to agree a long-term rental. Houlding would only agree to this on the basis of a rent at a level unacceptable to the club. Negotiations having failed, the directors decided to leave Anfield and find another ground, leaving Houlding with an empty stadium. His response was to form a new football club to occupy the stadium. He attempted to retain the team name "Everton" by registering the name "Everton Football Club and Athletic Grounds Company, Limited" with Companies House, but the Football League decided that the name belonged to the departed Everton club, which acquired new premises at Goodison Park. Houlding therefore adopted the name "Liverpool Football Club" for his new venture.Having established his new club, Houlding applied for membership of the First Division of the Football League, rather than the newly formed Second Division. The League, unimpressed with this premature application, refused to admit the club, which instead joined the Lancashire League. Liverpool played their first match on 1 September 1892, a pre-season friendly match against Rotherham Town, which they won 7–1. The team Liverpool fielded against Rotherham was composed entirely of Scottish players – manager John McKenna had recruited the players after a scouting trip to Scotland – so they became known as the "team of Macs". Liverpool's first match in the Lancashire League, which they won 8–0, was against Higher Walton. 200 spectators attended the match, but as the twenty-two match season proceeded, and Liverpool continued to win, attendances increased. Approximately 2,000 people watched Liverpool defeat South Shore in the penultimate match of the season at Anfield.Liverpool's first season was successful, as the club narrowly won the Lancashire League title on goal average, over Blackpool. They also won the Liverpool District Cup by defeating Everton. The subsequent theft of the league and cup trophies cost the club £130 to replace them. Following their success, Liverpool reapplied to the Football League. This application was successful, mainly because of the resignations of Accrington and Bootle from the Second Division. Liverpool's original strip had been blue and white chequered shirts and white shorts, similar to those of their neighbours Everton. From 1894 they changed to red shirts and white shorts.The club's first match in the Football League was against Middlesbrough Ironopolis on 2 September 1893, which they won 2–0, with Malcolm McVean scoring Liverpool's first goal in League football. Liverpool's first season in the Football League saw them unbeaten in 28 matches, 22 of which they won. They finished at the top of the Second Division, but as at that time there was no automatic promotion to the First Division, they were entered into the test match system. This involved a knockout match with the bottom team in the First Division, Newton Heath (later renamed Manchester United). Liverpool won, and took their place in the First Division. Their stay in the division lasted only a season, as they finished in bottom position, with seven wins from thirty matches. They were relegated to the Second Division, after facing Bury in the test match and losing 1–0, despite Bury playing most of the match with ten men after their goalkeeper was sent off.
As more people began to watch Liverpool, the ground capacity was expanded. The Main Stand was built, which helped to bring regular attendances of around 20,000. Liverpool's stay in the Second Division was brief, as they secured promotion to the First Division during the 1895–96 season – twelve wins in their final fourteen matches gave them a first-place finish, followed by success in the test matches over Small Heath (later renamed Birmingham City) and West Bromwich Albion. The club reached the semi-final of the FA Cup for the first time in the 1896–97 season; they were drawn against Aston Villa, and with Everton in the other semi-final, there was the prospect of a first all-Merseyside cup final. However, while Everton won their tie, Liverpool were defeated 3–0. After winning promotion, the club appointed Tom Watson, who was managing Sunderland, as their new manager. Watson's record of three League championships in four seasons with Sunderland convinced Houlding to make Watson the highest-paid manager in England, with a yearly salary of £300.
During the next two seasons Liverpool consolidated their place in the First Division, with fifth and ninth-place finishes. Performances improved in the 1898–99 season, when the club went into their final game with a chance of winning their first League championship. They faced Aston Villa, with whom they were level on points, although Villa's goal average advantage of 0.02 meant that they only needed to draw the match to win the League title. In the event, Villa won 5–0, to leave Liverpool as the runners-up. Liverpool also reached the FA Cup semi-final, where they faced Sheffield United. The match finished in a 2–2 draw; the first replay at Burnden Park also finished with the sides equal at 4–4, and a second replay at the small Fallowfield Stadium was abandoned when overcrowding caused fans to spill onto the pitch. The tie was finally decided at the Baseball Ground, which Sheffield United won 1–0.Liverpool won their first League championship in 1901. Integral to their success were their captain Alex Raisbeck, and striker Sam Raybould. Raisbeck, a centre-half, had been signed from Hibernian in 1898. He became club captain a year later, and was often the focal point of the team, as an important defensive player and the instigator of many of Liverpool's attacks. Raybould was signed from local club New Brighton Tower, and in the 1899–1900 season scored seven times as the club won nine of their last eleven matches, to finish in tenth place. He would go on to score 128 goals in 226 matches for Liverpool. Success in the 1900–01 season looked unlikely in February, at which point Liverpool had lost eight games and conceded 31 goals. However, they won nine and drew three of their next twelve matches, while only conceding four goals, to achieve their first League title. They were less successful in the following two seasons, finishing in eleventh and fifth places respectively. The 1903–04 season saw the club relegated to the Second Division; like the previous relegation it was only for one year as they won the division the following season. On their return in the 1905–06 season they became the first team to win the Second and First Division in successive seasons. They also reached the semi-final of the FA Cup, where they faced Everton and lost 2–0.Houlding died in 1902, and in 1905 the ownership of the club was restructured. Of the existing 3,000 shares, 2,000 were held by the Houlding family. The club owed a debt of £10,000 to Houlding, and a further £5,000 bank overdraft was guaranteed by his family. The family offered to give up the 2,000 shares and wipe out the debt, if the club relieved them of the bank loan guarantee. The board agreed, and a new share issue was released in 1906 with 15,000 shares available for £1 each. Following the share issue, McKenna became chairman of the club.Following the club's successes, a new stand was erected along the Walton Breck Road end of the ground. The stand became known as the Spion Kop – it was originally given this name by local journalist Ernest Edwards, the sports editor of the Liverpool Daily Post and the Echo, after a famous hill in South Africa, where a local regiment had suffered heavy losses during the Boer War. More than 300 men had died, many of them from Liverpool, as the British army attempted to capture the strategic hilltop.In the seasons following their second league title, Liverpool enjoyed limited success, generally finishing in midtable. They finished in second place behind Aston Villa in the 1909–10 season, the last for their captain, Raisbeck, who returned to his native Scotland to play for Partick Thistle. Liverpool's form declined after his departure, with their best performance in the League a 12th-place finish in the 1912–13 season. There was improvement in 1914 when the club reached their first FA Cup final, which they lost 1–0 to Burnley at Crystal Palace.The following season four Liverpool players were implicated in the 1915 British football betting scandal, which involved a match with Manchester United. A 2–0 victory for United was required to win the bet, in which players from both sides were involved. With the score at 2–0, Liverpool's Fred Pagnam hit the crossbar with a shot, at which several of his teammates gestured angrily towards him. Subsequently, Tom Fairfoul, Tom Miller, Bob Pursell and Jackie Sheldon were found guilty by a Football Association (FA) enquiry of conspiring with three Manchester United players (Sandy Turnbull, Arthur Whalley and Enoch West) to fix a United win. All the players involved were banned for life. Following the end of the First World War, in which Turnbull was killed at the Battle of Arras in 1917, the FA lifted the surviving players' bans in recognition of their service in the conflict.
Three weeks after visiting his hometown of Newcastle to celebrate his 56th birthday, Liverpool's manager Tom Watson developed a severe chill, which developed into pneumonia. He died on 6 May 1915; Raisbeck and two other former Liverpool stars, Ned Doig and Arthur Goddard, were pallbearers at the funeral.During the First World War, with normal Football League activity suspended, Liverpool competed in a regional league, the Lancashire Section. The competition was split into two parts: "Principal Tournament" and the "Supplementary Competition". Liverpool won the former in the 1916–17 season, and the latter in the 1917–18 and 1918–19 seasons. A number of Liverpool players fought in the war, including Philip Bratley, Robert Crawford and Wilfred Bartrop. Bartrop was the only one to be killed, dying on 7 November 1918 while fighting in Belgium.
When football resumed after the war for the 1919–20 season, Watson's post as manager was taken by David Ashworth. Liverpool finished in fourth place. During the season George V became the first reigning monarch to watch a League match, when Liverpool played Manchester City. Liverpool repeated their fourth-place finish in 1920–21. Another Scottish defender, Donald McKinlay, was given the captaincy from January 1922 to 1928. Liverpool regained the League championship in the 1921–22 season. Liverpool had looked certain title winners, before the loss of three of their last six games put their chances in doubt. A 4–1 victory over West Bromwich Albion in the last match of the season was enough to secure Liverpool's third League championship.Ashworth left Liverpool midway through the following season, to manage Oldham Athletic – he wished to be closer to his wife and daughter, who lived in nearby Stockport. His replacement was the former Liverpool player Matt McQueen, a club director. McQueen was intended as a temporary appointment, but he kept the job as Liverpool retained the League championship. This success owed much to the form of their goalkeeper Elisha Scott, who conceded only 31 goals during the season, a league record at the time. Liverpool's total of 60 points in the season equalled the record set by West Bromwich Albion three seasons earlier. Harry Chambers top scored in the first four post World War 1 seasons including the two title wins.Following their successive championships, Liverpool's fortunes declined as their side aged. Some of the players had begun their careers before the war; goalkeeper Scott had been in the side since 1912. The club began the 1923–24 season aiming to win three league titles in a row, but finished in twelfth place. They achieved fourth place the following season, which was to be their best finish until after the Second World War. Changes to the offside rule in the 1925–26 season resulted in an increase in the number of goals scored during matches. Liverpool contributed to this, with big victories over Manchester United and Newcastle United, but could only manage a seventh-place finish.In 1920, the Kop had been redesigned and extended to hold 30,000 spectators, all standing. At the time, the Kop was the biggest football stand in the country, able to hold more spectators than the entire capacity of some grounds. The increase in spectators did not fully restore Liverpool's fortunes; they scored 90 goals during the 1928–29 season, striker Gordon Hodgson scoring thirty of them, yet finished in fifth place. McQueen was unable to replicate his early triumphs with the club, and retired in 1928 after his leg was amputated following a road accident. He was replaced as manager by club secretary George Patterson. The club's fortunes did not improve under Patterson's leadership; they generally finished midtable. Their results were inconsistent; in September 1930, they lost 7–0 at West Ham United, yet nine days later they beat Bolton Wanderers 7–2 at Anfield.During the 1930s Liverpool's form continued to deteriorate, and they avoided relegation in the 1933–34 season by only four points. Scott left the club at the end of what had been a poor season for the veteran goalkeeper. In ten matches from the start of 1934, Liverpool won only once with Scott in goal, and after a 9–2 defeat against Newcastle United, he was replaced by Arthur Riley. The change of goalkeepers brought an upturn in form, with a 6–2 victory over Birmingham City and a 4–1 win against Middlesbrough. Scott, who joined Belfast Celtic after 24 years at Liverpool, remains the club's longest-serving player. As they became used to finishing in the lower part of the league table, Liverpool began to lose their best players. Hodgson, who had scored 233 goals in 358 league games, was sold to Aston Villa in 1936 and the club struggled to replace him. They finished 19th in the season following his departure. Also in 1936, Patterson resigned as manager for health reasons, and resumed his role as the club's secretary. His replacement, Southampton manager George Kay, did not initially fare much better; Liverpool narrowly avoided relegation in the 1936–37 season, and finished in 11th place in each of the following two seasons. By the outbreak of the Second World War, Liverpool had become accustomed to finishing midtable.Soon after the outbreak of war in 1939, the 1939–40 season was cancelled and all first-class football in Britain temporarily suspended. When matches resumed, competitions were played on a regional basis as in the previous war, and teams often did not complete a full season. Liverpool participated in the Football League North, which they won in the 1942–43 season. Many footballers served in the armed forces, away from their clubs for long periods, and would often appear as "guests" for other clubs. Two Liverpool players were decorated for their wartime service; Berry Nieuwenhuys received the Czech Medal of Merit, and Bill Jones was awarded the Military Medal after rescuing wounded comrades under fire.
League football in England resumed in the 1946–47 season, after seven seasons' suspension due to the war. Before the resumption, Liverpool embarked on an eight-week tour of the United States and Canada, scoring 70 goals in the ten matches played. In escaping from post-war food rationing while on tour, the Liverpool players were able to eat more, and by the end of the trip had gained in weight an average of 7 pounds (3.2 kg) a man. The New York Times reporter who followed the team on the tour noted the "perceptible gain in strength on the playing field."The first game played at Anfield after the war was against Middlesbrough, on 4 September 1946, which Liverpool lost 1–0 before a crowd of 34,140. Despite this defeat, Liverpool finished the 1946–47 season as League champions captained again by a Scot, Willie Fagan. Vital to this success were their attacking players; after a 5–0 defeat to Manchester United the club bought Albert Stubbins from Newcastle United, to augment the attack alongside Jack Balmer and Billy Liddell. Stubbins and Balmer joined top scored with 24 league goals and Balmer scoring hat-tricks in three successive matches.The club were unable to match this success in the two seasons that followed, and finished in 11th and 12th places respectively. The 1949–50 season brought another disappointing league campaign. The season started well, as the club was unbeaten in their first 19 matches and was top of the league at the turn of the year. Their form declined thereafter, and they finished eighth. This did not hinder their progress in the FA Cup, as they reached their second final (their first at Wembley), against Arsenal. They were unable to win their first FA Cup; two goals from Arsenal striker Reg Lewis meant Liverpool lost 2–0.After their FA Cup final appearance, Liverpool's fortunes declined steadily. Kay resigned through ill-health, and was replaced by Don Welsh. Welsh's first season did not go smoothly, as Liverpool were knocked out of the FA Cup in the third round by Norwich City of the Third Division South. The following year, 61,905 spectators watched Liverpool beat Wolverhampton Wanderers 2–1 in the fourth round of the FA Cup, the biggest attendance ever recorded at Anfield. Under Welsh's stewardship the club gradually slipped further down the table, and were relegated to the Second Division in the 1953–54 season, after finishing in bottom place. Their relegation came after 50 uninterrupted years in the top division of English football.Liverpool's first season in the Second Division in 1954–55 brought them an 11th-place finish. During this season the club suffered the biggest defeat in its history, a 9–1 loss to Birmingham City. Although in the following season they improved to third place, it was not enough for Welsh to keep his job and he was sacked at the end of the season. His replacement was Phil Taylor, a former captain of the club and a member of the coaching staff. Taylor signed players such as Ronnie Moran, Alan A'Court and Jimmy Melia, who would become mainstays of the club for seasons to come, but was unable to guide Liverpool back to the First Division. The Liverpool board persisted with him, despite the club's loss to non-League side Worcester City in the third round of the FA Cup in January 1959. His tenure ended during the 1959–60 season; after a good start, their form began to tail off mid-season, and after a defeat to Huddersfield Town, Taylor resigned. The man who replaced him was Huddersfield's manager, Bill Shankly.
Butler, Bryon (1988). The Football League: The First 100 Years. Guildford: Colour Library Books. ISBN 0-86283-583-6.
Kelly, Stephen F. (1988). The Official Illustrated History of Liverpool FC: You'll Never Walk Alone. London: Queen Anne Press. ISBN 0-356-19594-5.
Liversedge, Stan (1991). Liverpool: The Official Centenary History, 1892–1992. London: Hamlyn Publishing Group. ISBN 0-600-57308-7.
Pead, Brian (1986). Liverpool: A Complete Record 1892–1986. Derby: Breedon Books. ISBN 0-907969-15-1.
Williams, John (2010). Reds: Liverpool Football Club – The Biography. Edinburgh: Mainstream Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84596-682-9.
Wilson, Jonathan; Murray, Scott (2013). The Anatomy of Liverpool: A History in Ten Matches. London: Orion. ISBN 978-1-4091-2692-8.

The history of Liverpool Football Club from 1959 to 1985 covers the period from the appointment of Bill Shankly as manager of the then Second Division club, to the Heysel Stadium disaster and its aftermath.
Overhauling the team during his first year at Liverpool, Shankly released 24 players and converted a boot storage room into a meeting place where he and his coaches discussed strategy. They won the 1961–62 Second Division title and were promoted to the First Division. Two seasons later, Liverpool won their first League title since 1946–47, thereby qualifying for Liverpool's first participation in UEFA competition. The following season, Liverpool won their first FA Cup. Further League titles followed in 1965–66 and 1972–73. 1973 brought their first European trophy, the 1972-73 UEFA Cup. The following season, Shankly's last, they won the FA Cup again.
Shankly's assistant Bob Paisley took over in 1974. His first season in charge was trophiless before winning the League title and UEFA Cup the following season. Three European Cups and four League titles followed before Paisley retired at the end of 1982–83. His assistant, Joe Fagan, took over.
Liverpool won a trophy treble during Fagan's first season as manager, winning the League title for the third straight year, the Football League Cup for the fourth straight year and a fourth European Cup. The following season, the club was involved in one of the worst football stadium disasters. Before the start of the 1985 European Cup Final versus Juventus, Liverpool fans breached a fence separating the two groups of supporters, and charged the Juventus fans. The resulting weight of people caused a retaining wall to collapse, killing 39 mostly Italians fans. This tragedy, the Heysel Stadium disaster, caused a five-year UEFA competition expulsion of English clubs.
Bill Shankly was appointed Liverpool manager on 1 December 1959. Shankly was approached at Huddersfield Town by Liverpool chairman Tom Williams, who asked if Shankly would like to manage "the best club in the country". Shankly replied, "Why, is Matt Busby packing up?" Liverpool's potential and the lack of ambition Shankly perceived at Huddersfield led him to accept. When he joined Liverpool the club had been in the Second Division since 1953–54 relegation. In his first season Shankly debuted Ian Callaghan, the club's future record appearance holder, and Roger Hunt, the club's future record League goalscorer.The club finished third outside the promotion spots in Shankly's first part-season (1959/60). He released 24 players at the season's end. As well as Callaghan and Hunt he also retained Gerry Byrne. Shankly recognising the abilities of the existing coaching team of Bob Paisley, Joe Fagan and Reuben Bennett retained all three. An Anfield boot storage room was adopted as a strategy discussion venue by him and his coaches. The Boot Room, as it became known, became integral to their success. Bob Paisley remarked, "You got a more wide-ranging discussion in the Boot Room than the boardroom. What went on was kept within those four walls. There was a certain mystique about the place."
They again finished third the following 1960/61 season. Despite a 14-game run without loss, 5 defeats in the opening 11 matches  cost Liverpool promotion. Shareholder John Moores felt the club needed to spend more money on players to be successful and encouraged chairman T. V. Williams to do so. That summer of 1961 Shankly signed Ian St John from Motherwell and Ron Yeats from Dundee United. ‘Take a walk around my centre-half, gentlemen, he’s a colossus!’ Shankly said to the press conference when announcing Yeats’ arrival. Shankly confidently challenged the board of directors to "sack me if they can't play." St John and Yeats in their first season helped win promotion to the First Division; Unbeaten at home all season, they won the Second Division with 62 points.Liverpool were back in the First Division for the first time in eight years in 1962–63. Liverpool won only four and lost seven of their first 14 games back in the top flight. Shankly responded by signing Willie Stevenson at left half. They were up to fifth by March 1963 after 13 unbeaten matches. After their 1–0 FA Cup semi-final loss to Leicester City, poor results including a 7–2 loss to Tottenham Hotspur led to finishing eighth.In summer of 1963 Shankly signed Peter Thompson from Preston North End to play on the right side of midfield. In October he debuted Tommy Lawrence who dominated the club's goalkeeping for the rest of the decade. Liverpool started 1963–64 poorly, taking only nine points from the first nine games. Their 2–1 first Merseyside derby win over Everton since 1950 initiated moving up the table. They won 47 points from their next 30 games  securing their sixth League title and their first qualification for UEFA competition. Success increased Anfield's average attendance above 50,000. Increasingly vocal fans adopted You'll Never Walk Alone as their anthem.Shankly changed the team kit for their 1964-65 European Cup second round tie versus R.S.C. Anderlecht. He felt the players in the new all-red would appear more intimidating than in the previous red shirts, white shorts and white socks. Liverpool lost in the semi-final to Internazionale. Shankly felt the referee biased allowing questionable Italian goals. In the 1965 FA Cup Final Hunt put Liverpool ahead in extra time. Leeds United's Billy Bremner equalised. St John then scored for a 2–1 first ever Liverpool FA Cup triumph. Defence of their League title ended in seventh place.The 1966 European Cup Winners' Cup Final was 1–1 after 90 minutes. Borussia Dortmund won 2–1 after extra time. Shankly stated afterwards, "We didn't play well and we gave away two silly goals." Their FA Cup defence ended in the third round to Chelsea. They regained the League title on the last day of April 1966 with two Hunt goals to beat Chelsea . Yeats matched Alex Raisbeck and Donald MacKinlay as double league title winning, Scottish Liverpool captains.
Liverpool exited 7–3 on aggregate to Johan Cruyff's Ajax in the 1966–67 European Cup second round. They finished fifth in the 1966–67 Football League winning only 2 of their last 11 games.Liverpool were league leaders through much of September, October and November 1967. Playing 59 games all season, they were unable to sustain a domestic nor Inter-Cities Fairs Cup challenge. They finished third in the 1967–68 Football League behind champions Manchester City. Their furthest progress that season in three knock-out trophies was the FA Cup quarter-final.Poor performances in the 1968/69 cup competitions meant Liverpool had less fixture congestion than the previous season. They finished second in the 1968–69 Football League six points behind Leeds United. Left back, Gerry Byrne, retired after 333 appearances and 12 seasons. Shankly started replacing ageing players in his squad, purchasing future captain Emlyn Hughes and goalkeeper Ray Clemence the season before. Tony Hateley joined for a club record fee of £96,000 from Chelsea, but transferred after a year to Coventry City after injury and poor form. Mid-season Shankly signed Alun Evans from Wolverhampton Wanderers for a then record £100,000 fee for a teenager. After a good start, Evans' career was curtailed by injuries.Liverpool were unbeaten in their first ten 1969–70 Football League matches until a 1–0 loss to Manchester United. A sixth-round FA Cup loss at second division Watford convinced Shankly to move on older players. Bobby Graham had already replaced Hunt as the main striker. St John and Yeats also made their last Liverpool appearances. Liverpool exited in the early rounds of the 1969–70 Inter-Cities Fairs Cup and League Cup and finished fifth in the league behind champions Everton.In 1970–71 players such as Clemence, Hughes, Alec Lindsay, Larry Lloyd and Steve Heighway reduced the average age of the team to 22. 21 year old John Toshack signed in November from Cardiff City for a club record £110,000 to spearhead the attack. His first Liverpool goal was 11 days later in a 3-2 derby comeback win after being two down to Everton. Liverpool had a second consecutive fifth place league finish. They exited the 1970-71 Inter-Cities Fairs Cup semi-finals to Leeds United. Brian Hall's goal clinched a 1970-71 FA Cup 2-1 comeback semi final over Everton. Heighway put Liverpool ahead in extra time in the final. Arsenal this time came back to win 2–1 for a Gunners League and cup double.Shankly signed 20 year old Kevin Keegan from Scunthorpe United on 10 May 1971. On his full debut in the 1971-72 Football League Keegan scored after 12 minutes. This was the first of 100 Keegan Liverpool goals and a successful strike partnership with Toshack. 18 year old Phil Thompson debuted as a substitute in a 3-0 Easter Monday win over Manchester United. Liverpool contesting a four-way title fight lost 1-0 in their penultimate game at Brian Clough's Derby County who had now completed their fixtures. On Monday 8 May 1972, Leeds' 2-1 loss at Wolverhampton Wanderers gave Liverpool their bite at the title. Needing to win the same evening if Leeds lost, Liverpool drew 0-0 at Arsenal with Shankly furious an 88th minute Toshack goal was disallowed. Derby stayed top.
In July 1972 Peter Cormack signed from Nottingham Forest equaling the record £110,000 fee Liverpool paid for John Toshack. Shankly described Cormack's signature as, 'The final piece in the jigsaw' of that team. In the 1972–73 season they duly won the League and the club's first European trophy, the UEFA Cup. Cormack and Keegan scored in a 2-0 Easter Monday showdown with title rivals, Don Revie's Leeds United. Fellow title contenders Arsenal only drew at Southampton the same day. Liverpool needing a final game draw for the title drew 0-0 at home versus Leicester City. Their eighth League title equalled the record held by Arsenal and was their first captained by a non-Scot, Tommy Smith. A 1973 UEFA Cup Final downpour meant the home first leg was abandoned after 27 minutes. Shankly in those 27 minutes felt the Borussia Mönchengladbach defence was suspect in the air. Shankly started tall forward, John Toshack, in the re-arranged game demoting the small build of Brian Hall to a substitute appearance in a 3-0 win. Toshack headed assists for two Keegan strikes with Lloyd also heading a goal. A 2–0 second leg, away loss meant Liverpool won 3–2 on aggregate. They were the first English team to win the League and a UEFA competition in the same season.John Smith became chairman in 1973 with his business experience to build a more corporate view for the club. He ended the club's policy of changing chairmen every three years. In 1973 the old Main Stand was demolished and replaced with official opening by the Duke of Kent on 10 March 1973. They exited to Yugoslav team Red Star Belgrade in the 1973–74 European Cup second round. Their 1973-74 Football League campaign was bookended with poor results (in contrast to champions Leeds United unbeaten in their first league 29 games). Liverpool finished second. A second FA Cup win came with two goals by Keegan and one by Heighway in the 1974 FA Cup Final beating Newcastle United 3–0. Ray Kennedy's end of season transfer from Arsenal was Shankly's last act as Liverpool manager. He resigned citing the need for a break and was replaced by his assistant Bob Paisley.
Shankly continued to turn up at their Melwood training ground where the players still referred to him as 'boss'. Reluctantly, Paisley asked him to stay away from training, in order to assert his authority as manager. Liverpool  were unbeaten in their first six 1974–75 Football League campaign matches. They recorded their record highest win, 11-0, versus Strømsgodset in the 1974–75 European Cup Winners' Cup first round. Liverpool exited to Hungarians Ferencváros on the away goals rule in the second round. They exited in the fourth round in the FA Cup and Football League Cup. They finished second in the league for a trophyless season. Paisley signed Phil Neal, Terry McDermott and Jimmy Case who would all score in future UEFA finals.Liverpool began the 1975–76 Football League campaign losing 2–0 to Queens Park Rangers (QPR). Liverpool's form picked up in the second half of the season. Only one point dropped in nine late season games left them a point behind QPR going into their final match. QPR had already finished their games. Wolverhampton Wanderers were a goal up at half-time but Liverpool won 3–1 to win the League title. Liverpool exited early in the FA Cup and League Cup. In the 1976 UEFA Cup Final, Club Brugge scored two early goals at Anfield before Ray Kennedy, Case and a Keegan penalty fought back for a 3-2 first leg lead. Keegan's equaliser in Belgium was enough for a 4-3 aggregate win and a second Liverpool winning of that trophy.Before the start of 1976–77 season, Keegan said, "There's a tremendous ambition among all the lads to win the European Cup. We've won everything else in the last five years and there's a feeling that the European Cup is going to be next." Liverpool started by losing only two of their first 16 games in the League to go top by September. Despite a Christmas period blip including a 5–1 loss to Aston Villa, Liverpool won their tenth League title. The 1977 European Cup Final was Liverpool's first. McDermott, Smith and Neal goals gave a 3-1 win over Borussia Mönchengladbach. They lost the 1977 FA Cup Final 2-1 to Manchester United to miss out on a trophy treble.
On 10 August 1977 Kenny Dalglish signed from Celtic for a new club record £440,000 fee to replace Keegan's £500,000 departure to Hamburg. Alan Hansen signed from Partick Thistle two months before Dalglish and Graeme Souness followed in January from Middlesbrough. Dalglish scored 20 goals in 42 1977–78 Football League games and scored from a Souness pass in Liverpool's 1978 European Cup Final 1–0 win over Club Brugge. They were the first British team to retain the European Cup. They finished seven points behind Nottingham Forest in the League who also beat them 1-0 in the 1978 Football League Cup Final replay. The first game was 0-0. Liverpool declined to take part in the 1977 Intercontinental Cup.Nottingham Forest beat Liverpool 2–0 on aggregate in the 1978-79 European Cup first round. Liverpool exited 1–0 to Sheffield United in the 1978-79 Football League Cup second round. They won their first six league games and were unbeaten before a match 12, 1–0 derby loss to Everton. Good form continued through the 1978-79 Football League campaign winning eight points above Nottingham Forest. Their 68 league points surpassed the previous record, 67 by Leeds United in 1968–69. Only 16 goals conceded was another record. Liverpool declined to take part in the 1978 Intercontinental Cup.Despite early defeats to Southampton and Nottingham Forest, Liverpool topped the 1979-80 Football League by January staying top for the rest of the season. A 4–1 win over Aston Villa in the penultimate game of the season retained the League title. They were unbeaten at Anfield all season where they conceded only eight goals. Liverpool exited in the first round of the European Cup to Soviet team Dinamo Tbilisi. They exited in the semi finals of the FA Cup and League Cup to Arsenal and Forest respectively. Liverpool were the first British club with a shirt sponsor, Hitachi. Chairman John Smith said, "The days are gone when a club like ours can control its destiny on the money coming through the turnstiles." In April 1980 Liverpool signed 18 year old Welsh striker Ian Rush, the club's future record goalscorer.In the 1980–81 Football League eight losses (the same as champions, Aston Villa), and 17 draws meant finishing fifth, their worst finish for 16 years. Their 1981 Football League Cup Final replay, 2-1 come back win over West Ham United was their first lifting of that trophy. Alan Kennedy put Liverpool ahead in extra-time in the 1-1 first game draw. Hansen and Dalglish scored in the replay. Alan Kennedy's solitary goal beat Real Madrid 1-0 for a third Liverpool European Cup Final win. They lost in the fourth round of the 1980-81 FA Cup 2-1 at Everton.
Bruce Grobbelaar became first team goalkeeper after Clemence's 1981 summer transfer to Tottenham Hotspur.  In the 1981-82 Football League campaign, Liverpool were twelfth after a Boxing Day 3-1 home defeat to Manchester City with only 6 wins from 17 games. Paisley responded by taking the club captaincy from Thompson and giving it to Souness. 11 successive wins towards the end of the season won the League four points above Ipswich Town. Liverpool lost 2-0 at Second Division Chelsea in the 1981-82 FA Cup fifth round. Ronnie Whelan equalised Steve Archibald's Tottenham goal with three minutes left in the 1982 Football League Cup Final. Liverpool retained the trophy 3-1 after extra-time with Whelan's second goal and one by Ian Rush. The 1981 Intercontinental Cup was Liverpool's first in that tournament. Flamengo won 3-0 at the National Stadium in Tokyo.Liverpool retained the League title in 1982–83, 11 points above Watford. Liverpool exited the FA Cup and European Cup in the fifth round and quarter-final respectively. A 1983 Football League Cup Final, 2–1 win over Manchester United meant Liverpool won that trophy for a third straight year. Alan Kennedy's late equaliser of Norman Whiteside's goal took the final to extra-time. Whelan scored the winner. Pre-season, Paisley announced it would be his last before retiring from management aged 64. Paisley won six League titles, three European Cups and three League Cups during his managerial reign, the most successful in Liverpool's history. His assistant, Joe Fagan, took over.
Fagan's era began with a unique treble. Liverpool topped the 1982-83 Football League in November and stayed there to win three points above Southampton. This equalled the record three consecutive League titles held by Huddersfield Town and Arsenal. Ian Rush top scored with 32 league goals and 13 in other competitions. The 1984 Football League Cup Final win was their fourth in a row. Everton were beaten by a solitary Souness goal in a replay at Maine Road after a 0–0 at Wembley Stadium In the 1984 European Cup Final they faced A.S. Roma at Roma's Stadio Olimpico. Neal scored first in a game drawn 1–1 after 90 minutes and extra time. In the penalty shoot-out, Steve Nicol shot the first kick over the bar. Neal, Souness, and Rush scored theirs to put liverpool 3-2 ahead after Bruno Conti had also shot over the bar. Francesco Graziani's spot kick rebounded over the bar after Grobbelaar's 'spaghetti legs' antics on the goal line. Alan Kennedy scored the decisive kick.
Liverpool lost the 1984 Intercontinental Cup to Argentine side CA Independiente 1–0 in Tokyo.In 1984-85 Liverpool failed to win a trophy for the first time in nine years. In October in the 1984-85 Football League Liverpool were in the relegation places. Form improved to finish second 13 points behind Everton. They exited in the third round of the 1984-85 Football League Cup. Semi final loss to Manchester United prevented an all Merseyside 1985 FA Cup Final with Everton.The 1985 European Cup Final was Liverpool's fifth such final. Before the match at the Heysel Stadium began, Liverpool fans breached a fence separating opposing fans. As Juventus fans fled to safety, the accumulation of people against a perimeter wall caused it to collapse, killing 39 mostly Italians fans. The wall collapse was followed by Juventus fans rioting at the stadium's other end. The match was delayed two hours before starting with fear abandonment would cause further violence. Michel Platini's penalty won the final 1–0 for the Italians.In the tragedy's aftermath, blame for the Heysel Stadium disaster was laid on the Liverpool fans. UEFA official Günter Schneider stated, "Only the English fans were responsible. Of that, there is no doubt." The Football Association withdrew English clubs from European competition. Two days later UEFA banned English clubs for "an indeterminate period of time". Liverpool were banned for three further years beyond the English club ban ending. Fagan had decided to retire before the match. With his 64th birthday approaching he felt not the ideal choice for the required team rebuilding. Dalglish took over, the club's first player-manager.
Hopkins, Stephen; Long, Cathy; Williams, John (2001). Passing Rhythms: Liverpool FC and the Transformation of Football. Oxford: Berg. ISBN 1-85973-303-4.
Inglis, Simon (1983). The Football Grounds of England and Wales. London: Willow. ISBN 0-00-218024-3.
Kelly, Stephen F. (1988). The Official Illustrated History of Liverpool FC: You'll Never Walk Alone. London: Queen Anne Press. ISBN 0-356-19594-5.
Liversedge, Stan (1991). Liverpool: The Official Centenary History, 1892–1992. London: Hamlyn Publishing Group. ISBN 0-600-57308-7.
Williams, John (2010). Reds: Liverpool Football Club – The Biography. Edinburgh: Mainstream Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84596-682-9.
Wilson, Jonathan; Murray, Scott (2013). The Anatomy of Liverpool: A History in Ten Matches. London: Orion. ISBN 978-1-4091-2692-8.

The history of Liverpool Football Club from 1985 to the present day covers the appointment of Kenny Dalglish as manager, the Hillsborough disaster, and the club's return to European competition in 1991. Throughout this period, the club played in the top tier of English football, which in 1992 became the Premier League.
Dalglish was appointed as player and manager after Joe Fagan resigned following the 1985 Heysel Stadium disaster, which resulted in Liverpool's indefinite ban from European competition. Liverpool won the league championship and FA Cup in Dalglish's first season, and won a further league championship in 1987–88. The Hillsborough disaster, which occurred during an FA Cup semi-final against Nottingham Forest at Hillsborough Stadium in April 1989, resulted in the deaths of 96 of the club's supporters. After the disaster, Dalglish led the club to their 18th title, in 1989–90; but the job was becoming too stressful and he resigned in February 1991.  The Taylor Report into the disaster recommended the end of standing terraces; to comply with its findings, Anfield was converted to an all-seater stadium during the early 1990s, which greatly reduced its capacity.
Dalglish's successor Graeme Souness won the FA Cup in his first full season in charge. In the newly formed Premier League, he struggled to sustain the club's domestic successes, and was replaced by Roy Evans midway through the 1993–94 season. Liverpool improved to fourth the following season and won the Football League Cup. In 1998, Gérard Houllier was appointed co-manager alongside Evans. The arrangement lasted until November when Evans resigned and Houllier became the sole manager. The club won a unique treble of trophies in 2001, and a year later finished second to Arsenal, their highest league finish in 11 years. Houllier departed the club in mid-2004.
Liverpool won the UEFA Champions League for the fifth time in Rafael Benítez's debut season, and he guided the club to a further FA Cup success in 2006. Midway through the 2006–07 season, the club was bought by Americans Tom Hicks and George Gillett. At the start of the 2010–11 season, Liverpool were on the verge of bankruptcy; the club was sold to New England Sports Ventures following a high court ruling. Roy Hodgson, who took over from Benítez, left the club in 2011, and Dalglish was again placed in charge of team affairs. He was replaced by Brendan Rodgers after the team finished eighth in the 2011–12 season. Rodgers guided Liverpool to second in 2013–14, but board disagreements over transfers and poor team performances led to his sacking in October 2015. Jürgen Klopp was his replacement.
Dalglish became manager following the resignation of Fagan after the Heysel Stadium disaster. He started by replacing long-serving full-backs Phil Neal and Alan Kennedy with Steve Nicol and Jim Beglin. Liverpool began the 1985–86 season poorly and were ten points behind Manchester United at the end of September. The club continued to struggle until the end of the season when they won eleven of their last twelve matches, as their rivals were dropping points. Liverpool needed to beat Chelsea in the last game of the season to win the league championship. A goal from Dalglish secured the championship. The club also progressed to the 1986 FA Cup Final, where they faced Everton. Liverpool went behind to a first-half goal from Gary Lineker, but two goals from Ian Rush and a Craig Johnston goal in the second half secured a 3–1 victory. The club had achieved a double of league championship and FA Cup in the same season for the first time.
At the start of the 1986–87 season, Rush announced his intention to leave Liverpool for Italian team Juventus when the season was finished. Rush did not want to leave but the club decided to sell him, as they were short of money due to their expulsion from European competition. Midway through the season, Dalglish signed John Aldridge to replace Rush when he left. Prior to his departure, Rush scored 40 goals. Liverpool finished second in the league behind Everton, and were knocked out of the FA Cup in the third round by Luton Town. The club did reach the 1987 Football League Cup Final, but they were beaten 2–1 by Arsenal. At the end of the season, Dalglish signed Peter Beardsley and John Barnes to improve their attack. Liverpool regained the league championship; they did not suffer defeat until their 29th match against Everton, one of two losses during the season. The club had the chance to complete the double, as they reached the final of the FA Cup against Wimbledon. Although favourites against a club who had only become a member of the Football League eleven years previously, they lost the match 1–0.Rush returned to Liverpool for the start of the 1988–89 season, due to homesickness. Liverpool struggled at the start of the season and by January they were nine points behind leaders Arsenal; by April the teams were level on points, and Arsenal were ahead on goal difference. By this time, Liverpool had reached the semi-finals of the FA Cup against Nottingham Forest at Hillsborough stadium on 15 April 1989. Within six minutes the match was abandoned; overcrowding at the Leppings Lane end of the ground resulted in the death of ninety-six people, as they were crushed against perimeter fencing. Ninety-four fans died, in what became known as the Hillsborough disaster, that day; the 95th victim died in hospital from his injuries four days later and the 96th died nearly four years later, without regaining consciousness. Liverpool won the replay 3–1 to reach the final against Everton. They led for the majority of the match from an Aldridge goal. Stuart McCall scored in the 89th minute to take the game into extra-time. Substitute Rush scored in the 95th minute, but McCall scored again in the 102nd minute to level the match. Another goal from Rush two minutes later secured a 3–2 victory for Liverpool. Once again, Liverpool had a chance at the double. Their final match of the season was against second-placed Arsenal, who were three points behind. The game had originally been scheduled for 23 April, but Liverpool's FA Cup commitments meant it was postponed and rearranged for 26 May. Arsenal needed to win the match by two clear goals to win the league championship. They took the lead in the 52nd minute when striker Alan Smith scored. With the match in injury time, Michael Thomas scored to give Arsenal a 2–0 victory. The result meant Arsenal won the championship on goals scored.After the season, an inquiry headed by Lord Taylor was set up to establish the causes of the Hillsborough disaster. The subsequent Taylor Report, published in 1990, found that failure of police control was the main reason for the disaster and recommended that major stadiums remove terracing and become all-seater venues. Liverpool started the 1989–90 season in good form, exemplified by a 9–0 victory over newly promoted Crystal Palace. Eight different players scored for the club, the only time this has occurred in English football. In October and November they lost four games, but they recovered to go unbeaten until a 1–0 loss to Tottenham Hotspur in March. Following the match, Liverpool signed forward Ronny Rosenthal on loan from Standard Liège. His impact was immediate; he scored seven goals in eight appearances, including a hat-trick against Charlton Athletic to help Liverpool to their eighteenth league championship. The club progressed to the semi-finals of the FA Cup, but they lost 4–3 to Crystal Palace after extra time.
Liverpool started the 1990–91 season by winning their first eight league games. They remained unbeaten until a 3–0 loss to Arsenal in December, followed by another to Crystal Palace at the end of the month. The club's form began to tail off and Arsenal moved above them in January.  After a 4–4 draw against Everton in an FA Cup replay in February, Dalglish announced his resignation as manager, citing stress as the reason. Coach Ronnie Moran became caretaker manager; he won three of the ten matches he was in charge of, as they fell further behind Arsenal. Former player Graeme Souness was announced as manager in April, but the club were unable to catch Arsenal, who won the league by seven points. Souness reshaped the team during the 1991–92 season, which not been replenished by Dalglish since the signings of Barnes and Beardsley.  Beardsley, Gary Gillespie and Steve McMahon were sold. Souness bought Dean Saunders for £2.9 million, but Liverpool finished in sixth position, the first time they had finished outside the top two since 1981. The club did reach the final of the FA Cup against Sunderland, which they won 2–0. The season saw Liverpool compete in Europe for the first time since the Heysel stadium disaster in 1985; they were readmitted a year after other English clubs. Liverpool reached the quarter-finals of the UEFA Cup, where they lost to Italian team Genoa 4–1 over two legs. The Boot Room, which had been a meeting place for Liverpool's coaches since Bill Shankly was manager was demolished during Souness' time at the club. A new press room was built in its place.Anfield was redeveloped at the start of the 1992–93 season following the recommendations of the Taylor report. A second tier was added to the Kemlyn Road stand, which included executive boxes and function suites as well as 11,000 seats. Renamed the Centenary Stand, it was officially opened on 1 September 1992 by Union of European Football Associations (UEFA) president Lennart Johansson. In the inaugural season of the Premier League, Liverpool again finished in sixth place, losing fifteen of their forty-two matches. They exited early in the FA Cup, League Cup and UEFA Cup Winners' Cup. In the 1993–94 season Liverpool won their first three games, but their form dipped as they lost four consecutive games. One positive was the emergence of striker Robbie Fowler from the club's youth team. He scored on his first-team debut against Fulham in the first leg of a League Cup tie, and scored all five goals in the return leg as Liverpool won 5–0. Liverpool continued to struggle during the season, culminating in a defeat to Bristol City in an FA Cup replay. Souness was sacked after the match and replaced by coach Roy Evans. The club ended the season in eighth place after losing sixteen of their games. Liverpool began to fall behind their rivals off the pitch. Manchester United made £93 million after they were floated on the stock market, while Liverpool made £22 million when media company Granada bought 9.9% of the club.
After the construction of the Centenary Stand, the Spion Kop was redeveloped for the start of the 1994–95 season. The stand became all-seater, retaining the single tier with a reduced capacity of 12,000. In Evans's first full season in charge Liverpool finished in fourth place, their best finish since the departure of Dalglish. The club reached the sixth round of the FA Cup, before losing 2–1 to Tottenham Hotspur and reached the 1995 Football League Cup Final against Bolton Wanderers. Two goals from Steve McManaman helped Liverpool to a 2–1 victory as they won their fifth League Cup. The season also saw several long-serving players leave the club, as Grobbelaar, Nicol and Ronnie Whelan departed. Before the start of the 1995–96 season, Liverpool signalled their intent to improve upon the previous season, signing forward Stan Collymore for a British club record £8.5 million. Collymore scored the only goal in a 1–0 win over Sheffield Wednesday in the first game of the season. Liverpool finished in third place. They reached the final of the FA Cup against Manchester United; an 85th-minute goal from Eric Cantona secured a 1–0 victory for United.Liverpool started the 1996–97 season well, and by the turn of the year they were top of the league, two points clear of Arsenal. The club were unable to maintain their form during the rest of the season, losses to Coventry City, Manchester United and Wimbledon resulted in the club finishing the season in fourth position. Despite early exits in the League and FA Cup, Liverpool reached the semi-finals of the UEFA Cup Winners' Cup. They were unable to progress after a 3–0 defeat in the first-leg, despite winning the second leg 2–0 and were knocked out 3–2 on aggregate against French team Paris Saint-Germain. Liverpool were without striker Fowler for the start of the 1997–98 season after he suffered knee ligament damage in a pre-season friendly. This was offset by the emergence of Michael Owen, who scored eighteen goals from thirty-six appearances. Paul Ince was signed to replace Barnes who joined Newcastle United. Liverpool were unable to challenge eventual winners Arsenal and finished thirteen points behind in third place. Further redevelopment took place at Anfield during the season with a second tier added to the Anfield Road stand.
Liverpool appointed Frenchman Gérard Houllier as co-manager alongside Evans for the 1998–99 season. Poor results put pressure on the partnership and after a 3–1 defeat by Tottenham Hotspur in the League Cup, Evans resigned. Houllier's first game as sole manager was a 3–1 defeat to Leeds United. Liverpool's form did not improve under Houllier and early exits in the UEFA and FA Cup were followed by the club finishing the season in seventh place, missing the qualification spots for European competition. Houllier reshaped the squad at the start of the 1999–2000 season. New players were brought into the squad such as Dietmar Hamann, Sami Hyypiä and Sander Westerveld; David James, Ince and McManaman left the club. Houllier continued the reshaping into the season when he signed forward Emile Heskey for a club record £11 million in March. Liverpool failed to secure a return to the UEFA Champions League, as they finished the season in fourth place. Their also performed poorly in the FA and League Cup, exiting early in both competitions.
In the 2000–01 season Liverpool won three competitions to complete a unique treble of trophies. The first trophy was the League Cup, when they beat Birmingham City 5–4 in a penalty shoot-out after the match had finished 1–1. They then won the FA Cup, as Owen scored two goals in the last ten minutes to overturn a one-goal deficit to win the match against Arsenal 2–1. The final trophy the club won was the UEFA Cup. An own goal in the last minute of extra time by Delfí Geli secured a 5–4 victory over Spanish team Alavés. Liverpool finished the league in third place, securing a return to the European Cup (now the UEFA Champions League) for the first time since the Heysel Stadium disaster. Liverpool's participation in the UEFA Champions League in the 2001–02 season saw the club reach the quarter-finals, where they were eliminated by German team Bayer Leverkusen 4–3 on aggregate. The season was Liverpool's best in the league in recent years, as they finished second, seven points behind Arsenal. Despite their improved performance in the league, Liverpool were unable to defend the FA and League Cup, exiting in the fourth and third rounds respectively. The season was overshadowed by Houllier's heart problems. He suffered chest pain at half-time during a match with Leeds at Anfield. He had an eleven-hour operation to fix an acute dissection of the aorta and did not return until February. His assistant Phil Thompson took charge of the team in the interim.Houllier signed several players at the start of the 2002–03 season, including Bruno Cheyrou, Salif Diao and El-Hadji Diouf. The former was preferred to Nicolas Anelka, despite the latter performing well during his loan from Paris Saint-Germain the previous season. Liverpool were unbeaten in their first twelve games in the league, which gave them a seven-point lead. A defeat to Middlesbrough in their next game started a run of twelve games without victory until they beat Southampton 1–0 in January. The club finished the season in fifth place. Despite early exits in the FA Cup and UEFA Champions League, Liverpool won the League Cup, defeating Manchester United in the final. The 2003–04 season started poorly for Liverpool as they lost their first game 2–1 to Chelsea. By the end of the year they had lost six of their eighteen matches in the league. In the second half of the season they only lost a further four games to finish in fourth position securing a place in the 2004–05 UEFA Champions League. They exited the UEFA and League Cup in the fourth round. In the FA Cup, they were eliminated by Portsmouth 1–0 in a fifth-round replay. At the end of the season Houllier was replaced as manager by Rafael Benítez.The 2004–05 season was a disappointment in the league as Liverpool finished in fifth place outside the UEFA Champions League qualification places. They were eliminated from the FA Cup third round by Burnley. The club reached the final of the League Cup, but lost 3–2 to Chelsea. Liverpool also reached the final of the UEFA Champions League and it appeared the club would lose their second final of the season when they were 3–0 down to Italian team Milan at half-time, but three goals in six minutes allowed Liverpool to draw level at 3–3. No goals in extra time meant the match went to a penalty shoot-out, which they won 3–2. A fifth-place finish in the Premier League meant Liverpool were not guaranteed entry into the Champions League and faced the prospect of not being able to defend their European title. UEFA eventually ruled that they would be allowed to do so, but would be required to start in the first qualifying round. They were eliminated in the first knockout round by Portuguese team Benfica. In the 2005–06 season they finished in third place. They also reached the 2006 FA Cup Final where they faced West Ham United. Liverpool won 3–1 in a penalty shoot-out after the match finished 3–3.
The 2006–07 season was Liverpool's first after American businessmen George Gillett and Tom Hicks bought the club, in a deal which valued it and its outstanding debts at £218.9 million. Liverpool once more came third in the league, this time 21 points behind Manchester United. They went out of both domestic cup competitions to Arsenal, but reached the 2007 UEFA Champions League Final where they again faced Milan. Unlike 2005, Liverpool were unable to recover from going behind, and lost the match 2–1. During the summer, Benítez strengthened his team by signing Fernando Torres for a club record £24 million, and midfielders Ryan Babel and Yossi Benayoun. They drew thirteen of their 38 matches and finished the season in fourth place. Liverpool exited the FA and League Cup in the fifth round, but in the UEFA Champions League reached the semi-finals for the third time in four seasons, where they lost 4–3 on aggregate to Chelsea. Torres scored 33 goals in all competitions, and in the process broke two club records; he became the first Liverpool striker since Fowler to score more than 20 goals in a league season, and equalled Roger Hunt's run of scoring in consecutive league matches at Anfield (8).In the 2008–09 season a 5–1 victory over Newcastle United in December gave Liverpool a three-point lead in the league with half of the season remaining. They did not win any games in January, and despite good form for the remainder of the season, were unable to catch Manchester United and finished in second place. In the FA and League Cup as they were eliminated in the fourth round. In the UEFA Champions League, they were again eliminated by Chelsea, this time at the quarter-final stage. The 2009–10 season was a disappointment for Liverpool as they were unable to improve on the previous season's performance, finishing seventh in the league. They lost eleven matches, nine more than the previous season, to finish outside the top four for the first time since 2005. The club also suffered poor form in the UEFA Champions League, they were eliminated in the group stages and subsequently entered the UEFA Cup (now rebranded as the UEFA Europa League). In the Europa League they reached the semi-finals. Their opponents were Spanish team Atlético Madrid, who progressed to the final on the away goals rule after the tie finished 2–2 on aggregate. Benitez left the club by mutual consent at the end of the season and was replaced by Roy Hodgson.
The club was sold to Fenway Sports Group during the 2010–11 season. Accounts had shown that Liverpool were £350 million in debt with losses of £55 million, causing auditor KPMG to qualify its audit opinion. The Royal Bank of Scotland who were the club's creditors, took owners Gillett and Hicks to court to force through a sale. The court ruled in the creditors' favour and the club was sold to Fenway Sports Group for £300 million on 15 October 2010. On the pitch, Liverpool's performances were poor. A 3–1 defeat to Blackburn Rovers in January, left the club in twelfth place in the league with nine defeats from twenty games. Hodgson was sacked after the match and replaced by former manager Dalglish. After a loss in his first match against Manchester United in the FA Cup, Liverpool eventually finished the season in sixth place. Dalglish bought several players at the start of the 2011–12 season, including Charlie Adam, Stewart Downing and Jordan Henderson. They finished in eighth place, the club's worst finish in eighteen years. In both the League Cup and FA Cup, they reached the final. The club won a record eighth League Cup, with a 3–2 penalty shoot-out victory against Cardiff City after the match finished 2–2. Liverpool lost the 2012 FA Cup Final 2–1 to Chelsea. The season was marred by the Luis Suárez racial abuse incident in October during a match against Manchester United, in which he racially abused Patrice Evra. He was fined £40,000 and banned for eight games. Dalglish was sacked at the end of the season and replaced by Brendan Rodgers.Rodgers promised "to dedicate my life to fight for this club and defend the great principles of Liverpool Football Club on and off the field." Liverpool finished seventh in his first season, but outperformed expectations the following season to put them into title contention. A run of 11 consecutive victories was halted by a 2–0 home loss to Chelsea. The defeat meant the title race was out of Liverpool's control. Having taken a 3–0 lead in their next match – away at Crystal Palace, Liverpool conceded three times in the final 15 minutes to draw 3–3. The result dented their title aspirations; although Liverpool went into the final day with a mathematical chance of winning the league, they were overhauled by Manchester City. In July, Suárez was sold to Barcelona for £75 million, and the following January Steven Gerrard agreed a move to LA Galaxy at the end of the campaign, ending 17 years at the club. Rodgers was sacked after a poor start to the 2015–16 season, and was replaced by German Jürgen Klopp. Liverpool reached the finals of the League Cup and UEFA Europa League, losing the former 3–1 in a penalty shootout after the match finished 1–1, and the latter 3–1 to Sevilla in Basel.
Cowley, Jason (2009). The Last Game: Love, Death and Football. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1-84737-185-0.
Kelly, Stephen F. (1988). The Official Illustrated History of Liverpool FC: You'll Never Walk Alone. London: Queen Anne Press. ISBN 0-356-19594-5.
Liversedge, Stan (1991). Liverpool:The Official Centenary History. London: Hamlyn Publishing Group Ltd. ISBN 0-600-57308-7.
Wilson, Jonathan; Murray, Scott (2013). The Anatomy of Liverpool: A History in Ten Matches. London: Orion. ISBN 978-1-4091-2692-8.
The recorded history of observation of the planet Mars dates back to the era of the ancient Egyptian astronomers in the 2nd millennium BCE. Chinese records about the motions of Mars appeared before the founding of the Zhou Dynasty (1045 BCE). Detailed observations of the position of Mars were made by Babylonian astronomers who developed arithmetic techniques to predict the future position of the planet. The ancient Greek philosophers and Hellenistic astronomers developed a geocentric model to explain the planet's motions. Measurements of Mars' angular diameter can be found in ancient Greek and Indian texts. In the 16th century, Nicolaus Copernicus proposed a heliocentric model for the Solar System in which the planets follow circular orbits about the Sun. This was revised by Johannes Kepler, yielding an elliptic orbit for Mars that more accurately fitted the observational data.
The first telescopic observation of Mars was by Galileo Galilei in 1610. Within a century, astronomers discovered distinct albedo features on the planet, including the dark patch Syrtis Major Planum and polar ice caps. They were able to determine the planet's rotation period and axial tilt. These observations were primarily made during the time intervals when the planet was located in opposition to the Sun, at which points Mars made its closest approaches to the Earth.
Better telescopes developed early in the 19th century allowed permanent Martian albedo features to be mapped in detail. The first crude map of Mars was published in 1840, followed by more refined maps from 1877 onward. When astronomers mistakenly thought they had detected the spectroscopic signature of water in the Martian atmosphere, the idea of life on Mars became popularized among the public. Percival Lowell believed he could see a network of artificial canals on Mars. These linear features later proved to be an optical illusion, and the atmosphere was found to be too thin to support an Earth-like environment.
Yellow clouds on Mars have been observed since the 1870s, which Eugène M. Antoniadi suggested were windblown sand or dust. During the 1920s, the range of Martian surface temperature was measured; it ranged from −85 to 7 °C (−121 to 45 °F). The planetary atmosphere was found to be arid with only trace amounts of oxygen and water. In 1947, Gerard Kuiper showed that the thin Martian atmosphere contained extensive carbon dioxide; roughly double the quantity found in Earth's atmosphere. The first standard nomenclature for Mars albedo features was adopted in 1960 by the International Astronomical Union. Since the 1960s, multiple robotic spacecraft have been sent to explore Mars from orbit and the surface. The planet has remained under observation by ground and space-based instruments across a broad range of the electromagnetic spectrum. The discovery of meteorites on Earth that originated on Mars has allowed laboratory examination of the chemical conditions on the planet.
The existence of Mars as a wandering object in the night sky was recorded by ancient Egyptian astronomers. By the 2nd millennium BCE they were familiar with the apparent retrograde motion of the planet, in which it appears to move in the opposite direction across the sky from its normal progression. Mars was portrayed on the ceiling of the tomb of Seti I, on the Ramesseum ceiling, and in the Senenmut star map. The last is the oldest known star map, being dated to 1534 BCE based on the position of the planets.By the period of the Neo-Babylonian Empire, Babylonian astronomers were making systematic observations of the positions and behavior of the planets. For Mars, they knew, for example, that the planet made 37 synodic periods, or 42 circuits of the zodiac, every 79 years. The Babylonians invented arithmetic methods for making minor corrections to the predicted positions of the planets. This technique was primarily derived from timing measurements—such as when Mars rose above the horizon, rather than from the less accurately known position of the planet on the celestial sphere.Chinese records of the appearances and motions of Mars appear before the founding of the Zhou Dynasty (1045 BCE), and by the Qin Dynasty (221 BCE) astronomers maintained close records of planetary conjunctions, including those of Mars. Occultations of Mars by Venus were noted in 368, 375, and 405 CE. The period and motion of the planet's orbit was known in detail during the Tang Dynasty (618 CE).The early astronomy of ancient Greece was influenced by knowledge transmitted from the Mesopotamian culture. Thus the Babylonians associated Mars with Nergal, their god of war and pestilence, and the Greeks connected the planet with their god of war, Ares. During this period, the motions of the planets were of little interest to the Greeks; Hesiod's Works and Days (c. 650 BCE) makes no mention of the planets.
The Greeks used the word planēton to refer to the seven celestial bodies that moved with respect to the background stars and they held a geocentric view that these bodies moved about the Earth. In his work, The Republic (X.616E–617B), the Greek philosopher Plato provided the oldest known statement defining the order of the planets in Greek astronomical tradition. His list, in order of the nearest to the most distant from the Earth, was as follows: the Moon, Sun, Venus, Mercury, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, and the fixed stars. In his dialogue Timaeus, Plato proposed that the progression of these objects across the skies depended on their distance, so that the most distant object moved the slowest.Aristotle, a student of Plato, observed an occultation of Mars by the Moon in 365 BCE. From this he concluded that Mars must lie further from the Earth than the Moon. He noted that other such occultations of stars and planets had been observed by the Egyptians and Babylonians. Aristotle used this observational evidence to support the Greek sequencing of the planets. His work De Caelo presented a model of the universe in which the Sun, Moon, and planets circle about the Earth at fixed distances. A more sophisticated version of the geocentric model was developed by the Greek astronomer Hipparchus when he proposed that Mars moved along a circular track called the epicycle that, in turn, orbited about the Earth along a larger circle called the deferent.In Roman Egypt during the 2nd century CE, Claudius Ptolemaeus (Ptolemy) attempted to address the problem of the orbital motion of Mars. Observations of Mars had shown that the planet appeared to move 40% faster on one side of its orbit than the other, in conflict with the Aristotelian model of uniform motion. Ptolemy modified the model of planetary motion by adding a point offset from the center of the planet's circular orbit about which the planet moves at a uniform rate of rotation. He proposed that the order of the planets, by increasing distance, was: the Moon, Mercury, Venus, Sun, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, and the fixed stars. Ptolemy's model and his collective work on astronomy was presented in the multi-volume collection Almagest, which became the authoritative treatise on Western astronomy for the next fourteen centuries.In the 5th century CE, the Indian astronomical text Surya Siddhanta estimated the angular size of Mars as 2 arc-minutes (1/30 of a degree) and its distance to Earth as 10,433,000 km (1,296,600 yojana, where one yojana is equivalent to eight km in the Surya Siddhanta). From this the diameter of Mars is deduced to be 6,070 km (754.4 yojana), which has an error within 11% of the currently accepted value of 6,788 km. However, this estimate was based upon an inaccurate guess of the planet's angular size. The result may have been influenced by the work of Ptolemy, who listed a value of 1.57 arc-minutes. Both estimates are significantly larger than the value later obtained by telescope.
In 1543, Nicolaus Copernicus published a heliocentric model in his work De revolutionibus orbium coelestium. This approach placed the Earth in an orbit around the Sun between the circular orbits of Venus and Mars. His model successfully explained why the planets Mars, Jupiter and Saturn were on the opposite side of the sky from the Sun whenever they were in the middle of their retrograde motions. Copernicus was able to sort the planets into their correct heliocentric order based solely on the period of their orbits about the Sun. His theory gradually gained acceptance among European astronomers, particularly after the publication of the Prutenic Tables by the German astronomer Erasmus Reinhold in 1551, which were computed using the Copernican model.On October 13, 1590, the German astronomer Michael Maestlin observed an occultation of Mars by Venus. One of his students, Johannes Kepler, quickly became an adherent to the Copernican system. After the completion of his education, Kepler became an assistant to the Danish nobleman and astronomer, Tycho Brahe. With access granted to Tycho's detailed observations of Mars, Kepler was set to work mathematically assembling a replacement to the Prutenic Tables. After repeatedly failing to fit the motion of Mars into a circular orbit as required under Copernicanism, he succeeded in matching Tycho's observations by assuming the orbit was an ellipse and the Sun was located at one of the foci. His model became the basis for Kepler's laws of planetary motion, which were published in his multi-volume work Epitome Astronomiae Copernicanae (Epitome of Copernican Astronomy) between 1615 and 1621.
At its closest approach, the angular size of Mars is 25 arcseconds (a unit of degree); this is much too small for the naked eye to resolve. Hence, prior to the invention of the telescope, nothing was known about the planet besides its position on the sky. The Italian scientist Galileo Galilei was the first person known to use a telescope to make astronomical observations. His records indicate that he began observing Mars through a telescope in September 1610. This instrument was too primitive to display any surface detail on the planet, so he set the goal of seeing if Mars exhibited phases of partial darkness similar to Venus or the Moon. Although uncertain of his success, by December he did note that Mars had shrunk in angular size. Polish astronomer Johannes Hevelius succeeded in observing a phase of Mars in 1645.
In 1644, the Italian Jesuit Daniello Bartoli reported seeing two darker patches on Mars. During the oppositions of 1651, 1653 and 1655, when the planet made its closest approaches to the Earth, the Italian astronomer Giovanni Battista Riccioli and his student Francesco Maria Grimaldi noted patches of differing reflectivity on Mars. The first person to draw a map of Mars that displayed terrain features was the Dutch astronomer Christiaan Huygens. On November 28, 1659 he made an illustration of Mars that showed the distinct dark region now known as Syrtis Major Planum, and possibly one of the polar ice caps. The same year, he succeeded in measuring the rotation period of the planet, giving it as approximately 24 hours. He made a rough estimate of the diameter of Mars, guessing that it is about 60% of the size of the Earth, which compares well with the modern value of 53%. Perhaps the first definitive mention of Mars's southern polar ice cap was by the Italian astronomer Giovanni Domenico Cassini, in 1666. That same year, he used observations of the surface markings on Mars to determine a rotation period of 24h 40m. This differs from the currently-accepted value by less than three minutes. In 1672, Huygens noticed a fuzzy white cap at the north pole.After Cassini became the first director of the Paris Observatory in 1671, he tackled the problem of the physical scale of the Solar System. The relative size of the planetary orbits was known from Kepler's third law, so what was needed was the actual size of one of the planet's orbits. For this purpose, the position of Mars was measured against the background stars from different points on the Earth, thereby measuring the diurnal parallax of the planet. During this year, the planet was moving past the point along its orbit where it was nearest to the Sun (a perihelic opposition), which made this a particularly close approach to the Earth. Cassini and Jean Picard determined the position of Mars from Paris, while the French astronomer Jean Richer made measurements from Cayenne, South America. Although these observations were hampered by the quality of the instruments, the parallax computed by Cassini came within 10% of the correct value. The English astronomer John Flamsteed made comparable measurement attempts and had similar results.In 1704, Italian astronomer Jacques Philippe Maraldi "made a systematic study of the southern cap and observed that it underwent" variations as the planet rotated. This indicated that the cap was not centered on the pole. He observed that the size of the cap varied over time. The German-born British astronomer Sir William Herschel began making observations of the planet Mars in 1777, particularly of the planet's polar caps. In 1781, he noted that the south cap appeared "extremely large", which he ascribed to that pole being in darkness for the past twelve months. By 1784, the southern cap appeared much smaller, thereby suggesting that the caps vary with the planet's seasons and thus were made of ice. In 1781, he estimated the rotation period of Mars as 24h 39m 21.67s and measured the axial tilt of the planet's poles to the orbital plane as 28.5°. He noted that Mars had a "considerable but moderate atmosphere, so that its inhabitants probably enjoy a situation in many respects similar to ours". Between 1796 and 1809, the French astronomer Honoré Flaugergues noticed obscurations of Mars, suggesting "ochre-colored veils" covered the surface. This may be the earliest report of yellow clouds or storms on Mars.
At the start of the 19th century, improvements in the size and quality of telescope optics proved a significant advance in observation capability. Most notable among these enhancements was the two-component achromatic lens of the German optician Joseph von Fraunhofer that essentially eliminated coma—an optical effect that can distort the outer edge of the image. By 1812, Fraunhofer had succeeded in creating an achromatic objective lens 190 mm (7.5 in) in diameter. The size of this primary lens is the main factor in determining the light gathering ability and resolution of a refracting telescope. During the opposition of Mars in 1830, the German astronomers Johann Heinrich Mädler and Wilhelm Beer used a 95 mm (3.7 in) Fraunhofer refracting telescope to launch an extensive study of the planet. They chose a feature located 8° south of the equator as their point of reference. (This was later named the Sinus Meridiani, and it would become the zero meridian of Mars.) During their observations, they established that most of Mars' surface features were permanent, and more precisely determined the planet's rotation period. In 1840, Mädler combined ten years of observations to draw the first map of Mars. Rather than giving names to the various markings, Beer and Mädler simply designated them with letters; thus Meridian Bay (Sinus Meridiani) was feature "a".Working at the Vatican Observatory during the opposition of Mars in 1858, Italian astronomer Angelo Secchi noticed a large blue triangular feature, which he named the "Blue Scorpion". This same seasonal cloud-like formation was seen by English astronomer J. Norman Lockyer in 1862, and it has been viewed by other observers. During the 1862 opposition, Dutch astronomer Frederik Kaiser produced drawings of Mars. By comparing his illustrations to those of Huygens and the English natural philosopher Robert Hooke, he was able to further refine the rotation period of Mars. His value of 24h 37m 22.6s is accurate to within a tenth of a second.
Father Secchi produced some of the first color illustrations of Mars in 1863. He used the names of famous explorers for the distinct features. In 1869, he observed two dark linear features on the surface that he referred to as canali, which is Italian for 'channels' or 'grooves'. In 1867, English astronomer Richard A. Proctor created a more detailed map of Mars based on the 1864 drawings of English astronomer William R. Dawes. Proctor named the various lighter or darker features after astronomers, past and present, who had contributed to the observations of Mars. During the same decade, comparable maps and nomenclature were produced by the French astronomer Camille Flammarion and the English astronomer Nathan Green.At the University of Leipzig in 1862–64, German astronomer Johann K. F. Zöllner developed a custom photometer to measure the reflectivity of the Moon, planets and bright stars. For Mars, he derived an albedo of 0.27. Between 1877 and 1893, German astronomers Gustav Müller and Paul Kempf observed Mars using Zöllner's photometer. They found a small phase coefficient—the variation in reflectivity with angle—indicating that the surface of Mars is smooth and without large irregularities. In 1867, French astronomer Pierre Janssen and British astronomer William Huggins used spectroscopes to examine the atmosphere of Mars. Both compared the optical spectrum of Mars to that of the Moon. As the spectrum of the latter did not display absorption lines of water, they believed they had detected the presence of water vapor in the atmosphere of Mars. This result was confirmed by German astronomer Herman C. Vogel in 1872 and English astronomer Edward W. Maunder in 1875, but would later come into question.A particularly favorable perihelic opposition occurred in 1877. The English astronomer David Gill used this opportunity to measure the diurnal parallax of Mars from Ascension Island, which led to a parallax estimate of 8.78 ± 0.01 arcseconds. Using this result, he was able to more accurately determine the distance of the Earth from the Sun, based upon the relative size of the orbits of Mars and the Earth. He noted that the edge of the disk of Mars appeared fuzzy because of its atmosphere, which limited the precision he could obtain for the planet's position.In August 1877, the American astronomer Asaph Hall discovered the two moons of Mars using a 660 mm (26 in) telescope at the U.S. Naval Observatory. The names of the two satellites, Phobos and Deimos, were chosen by Hall based upon a suggestion by Henry Madan, a science instructor at Eton College in England.
During the 1877 opposition, Italian astronomer Giovanni Schiaparelli used a 22 cm (8.7 in) telescope to help produce the first detailed map of Mars. These maps notably contained features he called canali, which were later shown to be an optical illusion. These canali were supposedly long straight lines on the surface of Mars to which he gave names of famous rivers on Earth. His term canali was popularly mistranslated in English as canals. In 1886, the English astronomer William F. Denning observed that these linear features were irregular in nature and showed concentrations and interruptions. By 1895, English astronomer Edward Maunder became convinced that the linear features were merely the summation of many smaller details.In his 1892 work La planète Mars et ses conditions d'habitabilité, Camille Flammarion wrote about how these channels resembled man-made canals, which an intelligent race could use to redistribute water across a dying Martian world. He advocated for the existence of such inhabitants, and suggested they may be more advanced than humans.Influenced by the observations of Schiaparelli, Percival Lowell founded an observatory with 30-and-45 cm (12-and-18 in) telescopes. The observatory was used for the exploration of Mars during the last good opportunity in 1894 and the following less favorable oppositions. He published books on Mars and life on the planet, which had a great influence on the public. The canali were found by other astronomers, such as Henri Joseph Perrotin and Louis Thollon using a 38 cm (15 in) refractor at the Nice Observatory in France, one of the largest telescopes of that time.Beginning in 1901, American astronomer A. E. Douglass attempted to photograph the canal features of Mars. These efforts appeared to succeed when American astronomer Carl O. Lampland published photographs of the supposed canals in 1905. Although these results were widely accepted, they became contested by Greek astronomer Eugène M. Antoniadi, English naturalist Alfred Russel Wallace and others as merely imagined features. As bigger telescopes were used, fewer long, straight canali were observed. During an observation in 1909 by Flammarion with a 84 cm (33 in) telescope, irregular patterns were observed, but no canali were seen.
Surface obscuration caused by yellow clouds had been noted in the 1870s when they were observed by Schiaparelli. Evidence for such clouds was observed during the oppositions of 1892 and 1907. In 1909, Antoniadi noted that the presence of yellow clouds was associated with the obscuration of albedo features. He discovered that Mars appeared more yellow during oppositions when the planet was closest to the Sun and was receiving more energy. He suggested windblown sand or dust as the cause of the clouds.In 1894, American astronomer William W. Campbell found that the spectrum of Mars was identical to the spectrum of the Moon, throwing doubt on the burgeoning theory that the atmosphere of Mars is similar to that of the Earth. Previous detections of water in the atmosphere of Mars were explained by unfavorable conditions, and Campbell determined that the water signature came entirely from the Earth's atmosphere. Although he agreed that the ice caps did indicate there was water in the atmosphere, he did not believe the caps were sufficiently large to allow the water vapor to be detected. At the time, Campbell's results were considered controversial and were criticized by members of the astronomical community, but they were confirmed by American astronomer Walter S. Adams in 1925.Baltic German astronomer Hermann Struve used the observed changes in the orbits of the Martian moons to determine the gravitational influence of the planet's oblate shape. In 1895, he used this data to estimate that the equatorial diameter was 1/190 larger than the polar diameter. In 1911, he refined the value to 1/192. This result was confirmed by American meteorologist Edgar W. Woolard in 1944.Using a vacuum thermocouple attached to the 2.54 m (100 in) Hooker Telescope at Mount Wilson Observatory, in 1924 the American astronomers Seth Barnes Nicholson and Edison Pettit were able to measure the thermal energy being radiated by the surface of Mars. They determined that the temperature ranged from −68 °C (−90 °F) at the pole up to 7 °C (45 °F) at the midpoint of the disk (corresponding to the equator). Beginning in the same year, radiated energy measurements of Mars were made by American physicist William Coblentz and American astronomer Carl Otto Lampland. The results showed that the night time temperature on Mars dropped to −85 °C (−121 °F), indicating an "enormous diurnal fluctuation" in temperatures. The temperature of Martian clouds was measured as −30 °C (−22 °F). In 1926, by measuring spectral lines that were redshifted by the orbital motions of Mars and Earth, American astronomer Walter Sydney Adams was able to directly measure the amount of oxygen and water vapor in the atmosphere of Mars. He determined that "extreme desert conditions" were prevalent on Mars. In 1934, Adams and American astronomer Theodore Dunham, Jr. found that the amount of oxygen in the atmosphere of Mars was less than one percent of the amount over a comparable area on Earth.In 1927, Dutch graduate student Cyprianus Annius van den Bosch made a determination of the mass of Mars based upon the motions of the Martian moons, with an accuracy of 0.2%. This result was confirmed by the Dutch astronomer Willem de Sitter and published posthumously in 1938. Using observations of the near Earth asteroid Eros from 1926 to 1945, German-American astronomer Eugene K. Rabe was able to make an independent estimate the mass of Mars, as well as the other planets in the inner Solar System, from the planet's gravitational perturbations of the asteroid. His estimated margin of error was 0.05%, but subsequent checks suggested his result was poorly determined compared to other methods.During the 1920s, French astronomer Bernard Lyot used a polarimeter to study the surface properties of the Moon and planets. In 1929, he noted that the polarized light emitted from the Martian surface is very similar to that radiated from the Moon, although he speculated that his observations could be explained by frost and possibly vegetation. Based on the amount of sunlight scattered by the Martian atmosphere, he set an upper limit of 1/15 the thickness of the Earth's atmosphere. This restricted the surface pressure to no greater than 2.4 kPa (24 mbar). Using infrared spectrometry, in 1947 the Dutch-American astronomer Gerard Kuiper detected carbon dioxide in the Martian atmosphere. He was able to estimate that the amount of carbon dioxide over a given area of the surface is double that on the Earth. However, because he overestimated the surface pressure on Mars, Kuiper concluded erroneously that the ice caps could not be composed of frozen carbon dioxide. In 1948, American meteorologist Seymour L. Hess determined that the formation of the thin Martian clouds would only require 4 mm (0.16 in) of water precipitation and a vapor pressure of 0.1 kPa (1.0 mbar).The first standard nomenclature for Martian albedo features was introduced by the International Astronomical Union (IAU) when in 1960 they adopted 128 names from the 1929 map of Antoniadi named La Planète Mars. The Working Group for Planetary System Nomenclature (WGPSN) was established by the IAU in 1973 to standardize the naming scheme for Mars and other bodies.
The International Planetary Patrol Program was formed in 1969 as a consortium to continually monitor planetary changes. This worldwide group focused on observing dust storms on Mars. Their images allow Martian seasonal patterns to be studied globally, and they showed that most Martian dust storms occur when the planet is closest to the Sun.Since the 1960s, robotic spacecraft have been sent to explore Mars from orbit and the surface in extensive detail. In addition, remote sensing of Mars from Earth by ground-based and orbiting telescopes has continued across much of the electromagnetic spectrum. These include infrared observations to determine the composition of the surface, ultraviolet and submillimeter observation of the atmospheric composition, and radio measurements of wind velocities.The Hubble Space Telescope (HST) has been used to perform systematic studies of Mars and has taken the highest resolution images of Mars ever captured from Earth. This telescope can produce useful images of the planet when it is at an angular distance of at least 50° from the Sun. The HST can take images of a hemisphere, which yields views of entire weather systems. Earth-based telescopes equipped with charge-coupled devices can produce useful images of Mars, allowing for regular monitoring of the planet's weather during oppositions.X-ray emission from Mars was first observed by astronomers in 2001 using the Chandra X-ray Observatory, and in 2003 it was shown to have two components. The first component is caused by X-rays from the Sun scattering off the upper Martian atmosphere; the second comes from interactions between ions that result in an exchange of charges. The emission from the latter source has been observed out to eight times the radius of Mars by the XMM-Newton orbiting observatory.In 1983, the analysis of the shergottite, nakhlite, and chassignite (SNC) group of meteorites showed that they may have originated on Mars.  The Allan Hills 84001 meteorite, discovered in Antarctica in 1984, is believed to have originated on Mars but it has an entirely different composition than the SNC group. In 1996, it was announced that this meteorite might contain evidence for microscopic fossils of Martian bacteria. However, this finding remains controversial. Chemical analysis of the Martian meteorites found on Earth suggests that the ambient near-surface temperature of Mars has most likely been below the freezing point of water (0 C°) for much of the last four billion years.

The history of the U.S. state of Minnesota is shaped by its original Native American residents, European exploration and settlement, and the emergence of industries made possible by the state's natural resources. Minnesota achieved prominence through fur trading, logging, and farming, and later through railroads, and iron mining. While those industries remain important, the state's economy is now driven by banking, computers, and health care.
The earliest known settlers followed herds of large game to the region during the last glacial period. They preceded the Anishinaabe, the Dakota, and other Native American inhabitants. Fur traders from France arrived during the 17th century. Europeans moving west during the 19th century, drove out most of the Native Americans. Fort Snelling, built to protect United States territorial interests, brought early settlers to the area.  Early settlers used Saint Anthony Falls for powering sawmills in the area that became Minneapolis, while others settled downriver in the area that became Saint Paul.
Minnesota gained legal existence as the Minnesota Territory in 1849, and became the 32nd U.S. state on May 11, 1858. After the upheaval of the American Civil War and the Dakota War of 1862, the state's economy started to develop when natural resources were tapped for logging and farming. Railroads attracted immigrants, established the farm economy, and brought goods to market. The power provided by St. Anthony Falls spurred the growth of Minneapolis, and the innovative milling methods gave it the title of the "milling capital of the world".
New industry came from iron ore, discovered in the north, mined relatively easily from open pits, and shipped to Great Lakes steel mills from the ports at Duluth and Two Harbors. Economic development and social changes led to an expanded role for state government and a population shift from rural areas to cities. The Great Depression brought layoffs in mining and tension in labor relations but New Deal programs helped the state. After World War II, Minnesota became known for technology, fueled by early computer companies Sperry Rand, Control Data and Cray. The Twin Cities also became a regional center for the arts with cultural institutions such as the Guthrie Theater, Minnesota Orchestra, and the Walker Art Center.
The oldest known human remains in Minnesota, dating back about 9000 years ago, were discovered near Browns Valley in 1933.  "Browns Valley Man" was found with tools of the Clovis and Folsom types.  Some of the earliest evidence of a sustained presence in the area comes from a site known as Bradbury Brook near Mille Lacs Lake which was used around 7500 BC. Subsequently, extensive trading networks developed in the region.  The body of an early resident known as "Minnesota Woman" was discovered in 1931 in Otter Tail County. Radiocarbon dating places the age of the bones approximately 8,000 years ago, approximately 7890 ±70 BP or near the end of the Eastern Archaic period.  She had a conch shell from a snail species known as Busycon perversa, which had previously only been known to exist in Florida.
Several hundred years later, the climate of Minnesota warmed significantly. As large animals such as mammoths became extinct, native people changed their diet.  They gathered nuts, berries, and vegetables, and they hunted smaller animals such as deer, bison, and birds.  The stone tools found from this era became smaller and more specialized to use these new food sources. They also devised new techniques for catching fish, such as fish hooks, nets, and harpoons. Around 5000 BC, people on the shores of Lake Superior (in Minnesota and portions of what is now Michigan, Wisconsin, and Canada) were the first on the continent to begin making metal tools. Pieces of ore with high concentrations of copper were initially pounded into a rough shape, heated to reduce brittleness, pounded again to refine the shape, and reheated.  Edges could be made sharp enough to be useful as knives or spear points.Archaeological evidence of Native American settlements dates back as far as 3000 BC; the Jeffers Petroglyphs site in southwest Minnesota contains carvings thought to date to the Late Archaic Period (3000 BC to 1000 BC). Around 700 BC, burial mounds were first created, and the practice continued until the arrival of Europeans, when 10,000 such mounds dotted the state.By AD 800, wild rice became a staple crop in the region, and corn farther to the south.  Within a few hundred years, the Mississippian culture reached into the southeast portion of the state, and large villages were formed.  The Dakota Native American culture may have descended from some of the peoples of the Mississippian culture.When Europeans first started exploring Minnesota, the region was inhabited primarily by tribes of Dakota, with the Ojibwa (sometimes called Chippewa, or Anishinaabe) beginning to migrate westward into the state around 1700. (Other sources suggest the Ojibwe reached Minnesota by 1620 or earlier.) There were also the Chiwere Ioway in the southwest, the Algonquian A'ani to the west, and possibly the Menominee in some parts of the southeast as well as other tribes which could have been either Algonquian or Chiwere to the northeast, alongside Lake Superior (possibilities include the Fauk, Sauk, and Missouria). The economy of these tribes was chiefly based on hunter-gatherer activities. There was also a small group of Ho-Chunk (Winnebago) Native Americans near Long Prairie, who later moved to a reservation in Blue Earth County in 1855.At some early point, the Missouria moved south into what is now Missouri, the Menominee ceded much of their westernmost lands and withdrew closer to the region of Green Bay, Wisconsin, and the A'ani were pushed north and west by the Dakota and split into the Gros Ventre and the Arapaho. Later tribes who would inhabit the region include the Assiniboine, who split from the Dakota and returned to Minnesota, but later also moved west as American settlers came to populate the region.
In the late 1650s, Pierre Esprit Radisson and Médard des Groseilliers were likely the first Europeans to meet Dakota Native Americans while following the southern shore of Lake Superior (which would become northern Wisconsin).  The north shore was explored in the 1660s.  Among the first to do this was Claude Allouez, a missionary on Madeline Island.  He made an early map of the area in 1671.Around this time, the Ojibwa Native Americans reached Minnesota as part of a westward migration.  Having come from a region around Maine, they were experienced at dealing with European traders.  They dealt in furs and possessed guns.  Tensions rose between the Ojibwa and Dakota in the ensuing years.In 1671, France signed a treaty with a number of tribes to allow trade.  Shortly thereafter, French trader Daniel Greysolon, Sieur du Lhut arrived in the area and began trading with the local tribes. Du Lhut explored the western area of Lake Superior, near his namesake, the city of Duluth, and areas south of there.  He helped to arrange a peace agreement between the Dakota and Ojibwa tribes in 1679.
Father Louis Hennepin with companions Michel Aco and Antoine Auguelle (a.k.a. Picard Du Gay) headed north from the area of Illinois after coming into that area with an exploration party headed by René-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle. They were captured by a Dakota tribe in 1680.  While with the tribe, they came across and named the Falls of Saint Anthony. Soon, Du Lhut negotiated to have Hennepin's party released from captivity.  Hennepin returned to Europe and wrote a book, Description of Louisiana, published in 1683, about his travels where many portions (including the part about Saint Anthony Falls) were strongly embellished.  As an example, he described the falls as being a drop of fifty or sixty feet, when they were really only about sixteen feet. Pierre-Charles Le Sueur explored the Minnesota River to the Blue Earth area around 1700.  He thought the blue earth was a source of copper, and he told stories about the possibility of mineral wealth, but there actually was no copper to be found.Explorers searching for the fabled Northwest Passage and large inland seas in North America continued to pass through the state. In 1721, the French built Fort Beauharnois on Lake Pepin. In 1731, the Grand Portage trail was first traversed by a European, Pierre La Vérendrye.  He used a map written down on a piece of birch bark by Ochagach, an Assiniboine guide. The North West Company, which traded in fur and competed with the Hudson's Bay Company, was established along the Grand Portage in 1783–1784.Jonathan Carver, a shoemaker from Massachusetts, visited the area in 1767 as part of another expedition.  He and the rest of the exploration party were only able to stay for a relatively short period, due to supply shortages.  They headed back east to Fort Michilimackinac, where Carver wrote journals about the trip, though others would later claim the stories were largely plagiarized from others.  The stories were published in 1778, but Carver died before the book earned him much money. Carver County and Carver's Cave are named for him.Until 1818 the Red River Valley was considered British and was subject to several colonization schemes, such as the Red River Colony.  The boundary where the Red River crossed the 49th parallel was not marked until 1823, when Stephen H. Long conducted a survey expedition.  When several hundred settlers abandoned the Red River Colony in the 1820s, they entered the United States by way of the Red River Valley, instead of moving to eastern Canada or returning to Europe. The region had been occupied by Métis people, the children of voyageurs and Native Americans, since the middle 17th century.Several efforts were made to determine the source of the Mississippi River.  The true source was found in 1832, when Henry Schoolcraft was guided by a group of Ojibwa headed by Ozaawindib ("Yellow Head") to a lake in northern Minnesota.  Schoolcraft named it Lake Itasca, combining the Latin words veritas ("truth") and caput ("head").  The native name for the lake was Omashkooz, meaning elk. Other explorers of the area include Zebulon Pike in 1806, Major Stephen Long in 1817, George William Featherstonhaugh in 1835, and John Pope (military officer) in 1849. Featherstonhaugh conducted a geological survey of the Minnesota River valley and wrote an account entitled A Canoe Voyage up the Minnay Sotor.Joseph Nicollet scouted the area in the late 1830s, exploring and mapping the Upper Mississippi River basin, the St. Croix River, and the land between the Mississippi and Missouri Rivers.  He and John C. Frémont left their mark in the southwest of the state, carving their names in the pipestone quarries near Winnewissa Falls (an area now part of Pipestone National Monument in Pipestone County).Henry Wadsworth Longfellow never explored the state, but he did help to make it popular.  He published The Song of Hiawatha in 1855, which contains references to many regions in Minnesota.  The story was based on Ojibwa legends carried back east by other explorers and traders (particularly those collected by Henry Rowe Schoolcraft).
All of the land east of the Mississippi River was granted to the United States by the Second Treaty of Paris at the end of the American Revolution in 1783. This included what would become modern day Saint Paul but only part of Minneapolis, including the northeast, north-central and east-central portions of the state. The western portion of the state was part of the Spanish Louisiana since the Treaty of Fontainebleau, in 1762. The wording of the treaty in the Minnesota area depended on landmarks reported by fur traders, who erroneously reported an "Isle Phelipeaux" in Lake Superior, a "Long Lake" west of the island, and the belief that the Mississippi River ran well into modern Canada.  Most of the state was purchased in 1803 from France as part of the Louisiana Purchase.  Parts of northern Minnesota were considered to be in Rupert's Land. The exact definition of the boundary between Minnesota and British North America was not addressed until the Anglo-American Convention of 1818, which set the U.S.–Canada border at the 49th parallel west of the Lake of the Woods (except for a small chunk of land now dubbed the Northwest Angle). Border disputes east of the Lake of the Woods continued until the Webster-Ashburton Treaty of 1842.Throughout the first half of the 19th century, the northeastern portion of the state was a part of the Northwest Territory, then the Illinois Territory, then the Michigan Territory, and finally the Wisconsin Territory. The western and southern areas of the state, although theoretically part of the Wisconsin Territory from its creation in 1836, were not formally organized until 1838, when they became part of the Iowa Territory.
Fort Snelling was the first major U.S. military presence in the state. The land for the fort, at the confluence of the Minnesota and Mississippi rivers, was acquired in 1805 by Zebulon Pike. When concerns mounted about the fur trade in the area, construction of the fort began in 1819.  Construction was completed in 1825, and Colonel Josiah Snelling and his officers and soldiers left their imprint on the area. One of the missions of the fort was to mediate disputes between the Ojibwe and the Dakota tribes. Lawrence Taliaferro was an agent of the U.S. Bureau of Indian Affairs.  He spent 20 years at the site, finally resigning in 1839.In the 1850s, Fort Snelling played a key role in the infamous Dred Scott court case.  Slaves Dred Scott and his wife were taken to the fort by their master, John Emerson.  They lived at the fort and elsewhere in territories where slavery was prohibited.  After Emerson's death, the Scotts argued that since they had lived in free territory, they were no longer slaves.  Ultimately, the U.S. Supreme Court sided against the Scotts.  Dred Scott Field, located just a short distance away in Bloomington, is named in the memory of Fort Snelling's significance in one of the most important legal precedents in U.S. History.By 1851, treaties between Native American tribes and the U.S. government had opened much of Minnesota to settlement, so Fort Snelling no longer was a frontier outpost.  It served as a training center for soldiers during the American Civil War and later as the headquarters for the Department of Dakota.  A portion has been designated as Fort Snelling National Cemetery where over 160,000 are interred. During World War II, the fort served as a training center for nearly 300,000 inductees.  After World War II, the fort was threatened with demolition due to the building of freeways Highway 5 and Highway 55, but citizens rallied to save it.  Fort Snelling is now a historic site operated by the Minnesota Historical Society.Fort Snelling was largely responsible for the establishment of the city of Minneapolis.  In an effort to be self-sufficient, the soldiers of the fort built roads, planted crops, and built a grist mill and a sawmill at Saint Anthony Falls.  Later, Franklin Steele came to Fort Snelling as the post sutler (the operator of the general store), and established interests in lumbering and other activities.  When the Ojibwe signed a treaty ceding lands in 1837, Steele staked a claim to land on the east side of the Mississippi River adjacent to Saint Anthony Falls.  In 1848, he built a sawmill at the falls, and the community of Saint Anthony sprung up around the east side of the falls.  Steele told one of his employees, John H. Stevens, that land on the west side of the falls would make a good site for future mills.  Since the land on the west side was still part of the military reservation, Stevens made a deal with Fort Snelling's commander.  Stevens would provide free ferry service across the river in exchange for a tract of 160 acres (0.65 km2) at the head of the falls.  Stevens received the claim and built a house, the first house in Minneapolis, in 1850. In 1854, Stevens platted the city of Minneapolis on the west bank.  Later, in 1872, Minneapolis absorbed the city of Saint Anthony.The city of Saint Paul, Minnesota owes its existence to Fort Snelling.  A group of squatters, mostly from the ill-fated Red River Colony in what is now the Canadian province of Manitoba, established a camp near the fort.  The commandant of Fort Snelling, Major Joseph Plympton, found their presence problematic because they were using timber and allowing their cattle and horses to graze around the fort.  Plympton banned lumbering and the construction of any new buildings on the military reservation land.  As a result, the squatters moved four miles downstream on the Mississippi River. They settled at a site known as Fountain Cave.  This site was not quite far enough for the officers at the fort, so the squatters were forced out again. Pierre "Pig's Eye" Parrant, a popular moonshiner among the group, moved downriver and established a saloon, becoming the first European resident in the area that later became Saint Paul.  The squatters named their settlement "Pig's Eye" after Parrant.  The name was later changed to Lambert's Landing and then finally Saint Paul.  However, the earliest name for the area comes from a Native American colony Im-in-i-ja Ska, meaning "White Rock" and referring to the limestone bluffs nearby.Minneapolis and Saint Paul are collectively known as the "Twin Cities".  The cities enjoyed a rivalry during their early years, with Saint Paul being the capital city and Minneapolis becoming prominent through industry.  The term "Twin Cities" was coined around 1872, after a newspaper editorial suggested that Minneapolis could absorb Saint Paul.  Residents decided that the cities needed a separate identity, so people coined the phrase "Dual Cities", which later evolved into "Twin Cities".  Today, Minneapolis is the largest city in Minnesota, with a population of 382,618 in the 2000 census.  Saint Paul is the second largest city, with a population of 287,151.  Minneapolis and Saint Paul anchor a metropolitan area with a population of 2,968,806 as of 2000, with a total state population of 4,919,479.
Henry Hastings Sibley built the first stone house in the Minnesota Territory in Mendota in 1838, along with other limestone buildings used by the American Fur Company, which bought animal pelts at that location from 1825 to 1853.  Another area of early economic development in Minnesota was the logging industry.  Loggers found the white pine especially valuable, and it was plentiful in the northeastern section of the state and in the St. Croix River valley.  Before railroads, lumbermen relied mostly on river transportation to bring logs to market, which made Minnesota's timber resources attractive.  Towns like Pine City, Marine on St. Croix and Stillwater became important lumber centers fed by the St. Croix River, while Winona was supplied lumber by areas in southern Minnesota and along the Minnesota River. The unregulated logging practices of the time and a severe drought took their toll in 1894, when the Great Hinckley Fire ravaged 480 square miles (1,200 km2) in the Hinckley and Sandstone areas of Pine County, killing over 400 residents. The combination of logging and drought struck again in the Baudette Fire of 1910 and the Cloquet Fire of 1918.
Saint Anthony, on the east bank of the Mississippi River later became part of Minneapolis, and was an important lumber milling center supplied by the Rum River.  In 1848, businessman Franklin Steele built the first private sawmill on the Saint Anthony Falls, and more sawmills quickly followed. The oldest home still standing in Saint Anthony is the Ard Godfrey house, built in 1848, and lived in by Ard and Harriet Godfrey.  The house of John H. Stevens, the first house on the west bank in Minneapolis, was moved several times, finally to Minnehaha Park in south Minneapolis in 1896.
Stephen A. Douglas (D), the chair of the Senate Committee on Territories, drafted the bill authorizing Minnesota Territory.  He had envisioned a future for the upper Mississippi valley, so he was motivated to keep the area from being carved up by neighboring territories.  In 1846, he prevented Iowa from including Fort Snelling and Saint Anthony Falls within its northern border.  In 1847, he kept the organizers of Wisconsin from including Saint Paul and Saint Anthony Falls.  The Minnesota Territory was established from the lands remaining from Iowa Territory and Wisconsin Territory on March 3, 1849. The Minnesota Territory extended far into what is now North Dakota and South Dakota, to the Missouri River. There was a dispute over the shape of the state to be carved out of Minnesota Territory. An alternate proposal that was only narrowly defeated would have made the 46th parallel the state's northern border and the Missouri River its western border, thus giving up the whole northern half of the state in exchange for the eastern half of what later became South Dakota.With Alexander Ramsey (W) as the first governor of Minnesota Territory and Henry Hastings Sibley (D) as the territorial delegate to the United States Congress, the populations of Saint Paul and Saint Anthony swelled. Henry M. Rice (D), who replaced Sibley as the territorial delegate in 1853, worked in Congress to promote Minnesota interests.  He lobbied for the construction of a railroad connecting Saint Paul and Lake Superior, with a link from Saint Paul to the Illinois Central.
In December 1856, Henry M Rice brought forward two bills in Congress: an enabling act that would allow Minnesota to form a state constitution, and a railroad land grant bill. Rice's enabling act defined a state containing both prairie and forest lands. The state was bounded on the south by Iowa, on the east by Wisconsin, on the north by Canada, and on the west by the Red River of the North and the Bois de Sioux River, Lake Traverse, Big Stone Lake, and then a line extending due south to the Iowa border. Rice made this motion based on Minnesota's population growth.At the time, tensions between the northern and the southern United States were growing, in a series of conflicts that eventually resulted in the American Civil War. There was little debate in the United States House of Representatives, but when Stephen A. Douglas introduced the bill in the United States Senate, it caused a firestorm of debate. Northerners saw their chance to add two senators to the side of the free states, while Southerners were sure that they would lose power. Many senators offered polite arguments that the population was too sparse and that statehood was premature. Senator John Burton Thompson of Kentucky, in particular, argued that new states would cost the government too much for roads, canals, forts, and lighthouses. Although Thompson and 21 other senators voted against statehood, the enabling act was passed on February 26, 1857.After the enabling act was passed, territorial legislators had a difficult time writing a state constitution. A constitutional convention was assembled in July 1857, but Republicans and Democrats were deeply divided. In fact, they formed two separate constitutional conventions and drafted two separate constitutions. Eventually, the two groups formed a conference committee and worked out a common constitution. The divisions continued, though, because Republicans refused to sign a document that had Democratic signatures on it, and vice versa. One copy of the constitution was written on white paper and signed only by Republicans, while the other copy was written on blue-tinged paper and signed by Democrats. These copies were signed on August 29, 1857. An election was called on October 13, 1857, where Minnesota residents would vote to approve or disapprove the constitution. The constitution was approved by 30,055 voters, while 571 rejected it.The state constitution was sent to the United States Congress for ratification in December 1857. The approval process was drawn out for several months while Congress debated over issues that had stemmed from the Kansas–Nebraska Act. Southerners had been arguing that the next state should be pro-slavery, so when Kansas submitted the pro-slavery Lecompton Constitution, the Minnesota statehood bill was delayed. After that, Northerners feared that Minnesota's Democratic delegation would support slavery in Kansas. Finally, after the Kansas question was settled and after Congress decided how many representatives Minnesota would get in the House of Representatives, the bill passed. The eastern half of the Minnesota Territory, under the boundaries defined by Henry Mower Rice, became the country's 32nd state on May 11, 1858. The western part remained unorganized until its incorporation into the Dakota Territory on March 2, 1861.
Minnesota strongly supported the Union war effort, with about 22,000 Minnesotans serving. The 1st Minnesota Volunteer Infantry was particularly important to the Battle of Gettysburg. Governor Alexander Ramsey happened to be in Washington D.C. when Ft. Sumter was fired upon. He went immediately to the White House and made his state the first to offer help in putting down the rebellion.At the same time, the state faced another crisis as the Dakota War of 1862 broke out.  The Dakota had signed the Treaty of Traverse des Sioux and Treaty of Mendota in 1851 because they were concerned that without money from the United States government, they would starve, due to the loss of habitat of huntable game.  They were initially given a strip of land of ten miles (16 km) north and south of the Minnesota River, but they were later forced to sell the northern half of the land.  In 1862, crop failures left the Dakota with food shortages, and government money was delayed.  After four young Dakota men, searching for food, shot a family of white settlers near Acton, the Dakota leadership decided to continue the attacks in an effort to drive out the settlers.  Over a period of several days, Dakota attacks at the Lower Sioux Agency, New Ulm and Hutchinson, as well as in the surrounding farmlands, resulted in the deaths of at least 300 to 400 white settlers and government employees, causing panic in the settlements and provoking counterattacks by state militia and federal forces which spread throughout the Minnesota River Valley and as far away as the Red River Valley. The ensuing battles at Fort Ridgely, Birch Coulee, Fort Abercrombie, and Wood Lake punctuated a six-week war, which ended with the trial of 425 Native Americans for their participation in the war.  Of this number, 303 men were convicted and sentenced to death.
Episcopal Bishop Henry Benjamin Whipple pleaded to President Abraham Lincoln for clemency, and the death sentences of all but 39 men were reduced to prison terms.  On December 26, 1862, 38 men were hanged by the U.S. Army at Mankato—the largest mass execution in the United States. Many of the remaining Dakota Native Americans, including non-combatants, were confined in a prison camp at Pike Island over the winter of 1862–1863, where more than 300 died of disease. Survivors were later exiled to the Crow Creek Reservation, then later to a reservation near Niobrara, Nebraska.
A small number of Dakota Native Americans managed to return to Minnesota in the 1880s and establish communities near Granite Falls, Morton, Prior Lake, and Red Wing. However, after this time Dakota people were no longer allowed to reside in Minnesota with the exception of the meritorious Sioux called the Loyal Mdewakanton. This separate class of Dakota did not participate in the Dakota War of 1862, since they were assimilated Christians and instead decided to help some of the missionaries escape the Sioux warriors who chose to fight.
After the Civil War, Minnesota became an attractive region for European immigration and settlement as farmland.  Minnesota's population in 1870 was 439,000; this number tripled during the two subsequent decades.  The Homestead Act in 1862 facilitated land claims by settlers, who regarded the land as being cheap and fertile.  The railroad industry, led by the Northern Pacific Railway and Saint Paul and Pacific Railroad, advertised the many opportunities in the state and worked to get immigrants to settle in Minnesota. James J. Hill, in particular, was instrumental in reorganizing the Saint Paul and Pacific Railroad and extending lines from the Minneapolis-Saint Paul area into the Red River Valley and to Winnipeg.  Hill was also responsible for building a new passenger depot in Minneapolis, served by the landmark Stone Arch Bridge which was completed in 1883.  During the 1880s, Hill continued building tracks through North Dakota and Montana.  In 1890, the railroad, now known as the Great Northern Railway, started building tracks through the mountains west to Seattle.  Other railroads, such as the Lake Superior and Mississippi Railroad and the Milwaukee Road, also played an important role in the early days of Minnesota's statehood.  Later railways, such as the Soo Line and Minneapolis and St. Louis Railway facilitated the sale of Minneapolis flour and other products, although they were not as involved in attracting settlers.
Oliver Hudson Kelley played an important role in farming as one of the founders of the National Grange, along with several other clerks in the United States Department of Agriculture.  The movement grew out of his interest in cooperative farm associations following the end of the Civil War, and he established local Grange chapters in Elk River and Saint Paul.  The organization worked to provide education on new farming methods, as well as to influence government and public opinion on matters important to farmers.  One of these areas of concern was the freight rates charged by the railroads and by the grain elevators.  Since there was little or no competition between railroads serving Minnesota farm communities, railroads could charge as much as the traffic would bear.  By 1871, the situation was so heated that both the Republican and Democratic candidates in state elections promised to regulate railroad rates.  The state established an office of railroad commissioner and imposed maximum charges for shipping. Populist Ignatius L. Donnelly also served the Grange as an organizer.
Saint Anthony Falls, the only waterfall of its height on the Mississippi, played an important part in the development of Minneapolis.  The power of the waterfall first fueled sawmills, but later it was tapped to serve flour mills.  In 1870, only a small number of flour mills were in the Minneapolis area, but by 1900 Minnesota mills were grinding 14.1% of the nation's grain.  Advances in transportation, milling technology, and water power combined to give Minneapolis a dominance in the milling industry.  Spring wheat could be sown in the spring and harvested in late summer, but it posed special problems for milling.  To get around these problems, Minneapolis millers made use of new technology.  They invented the middlings purifier, a device that used jets of air to remove the husks from the flour early in the milling process.  They also started using roller mills, as opposed to grindstones.  A series of rollers gradually broke down the kernels and integrated the gluten with the starch.  These improvements led to the production of "patent" flour, which commanded almost double the price of "bakers" or "clear" flour, which it replaced. Pillsbury and the Washburn-Crosby Company (a forerunner of General Mills) became the leaders in the Minneapolis milling industry.  This leadership in milling later declined as milling was no longer dependent on water power, but the dominance of the mills contributed greatly to the economy of Minneapolis and Minnesota, attracting people and money to the region.
At the end of the 19th century, several forms of industrial development shaped Minnesota.  In 1882, a hydroelectric power plant was built at Saint Anthony Falls, marking one of the first developments of hydroelectric power in the United States.  Iron mining began in northern Minnesota with the opening of the Soudan Mine in 1884.  The Vermilion Range was surveyed and mapped by a party financed by Charlemagne Tower.  Another mining town, Ely began with the foundation of the Chandler Mine in 1888.  Soon after, the Mesabi Range was established when ore was found just under the surface of the ground in Mountain Iron.  The Mesabi Range ultimately had much more ore than the Vermilion Range, and it was easy to extract because the ore was closer to the surface.  As a result, open-pit mines became well-established on the Mesabi Range, with 111 mines operating by 1904.  To ship the iron ore to refineries, railroads such as the Duluth, Missabe and Iron Range Railway were built from the iron ranges to Two Harbors and Duluth on Lake Superior.  Large ore docks were used at these cities to load the iron ore onto ships for transport east on the Great Lakes.  The mining industry helped to propel Duluth from a small town to a large, thriving city.  In 1904, iron was discovered in the Cuyuna Range in Crow Wing County.  Between 1904 and 1984, when mining ceased, more than 106 million tons of ore were mined.  Iron from the Cuyuna Range also contained significant proportions of manganese, increasing its value.
Dr. William Worrall Mayo, the founder of the Mayo Clinic, emigrated from Salford, United Kingdom to the United States in 1846 and became a medical doctor in 1850. In 1863, Mayo moved to Rochester, followed by his family the next year. In the summer of 1883, an F5 tornado struck, dubbed the 1883 Rochester tornado, causing a substantial number of deaths and injuries. Dr. W. W. Mayo worked with nuns from the Sisters of St. Francis to treat the survivors. After the disaster, Mother Alfred Moes and Dr. Mayo recognized the need for a hospital and joined together to build the 27-bed Saint Marys Hospital which opened in 1889.  The hospital, with over 1100 beds, is now part of the Mayo Clinic, which grew out of the practice of William Worrall Mayo and his sons, William James Mayo (1861–1939) and Charles Horace Mayo. Dr. Henry Stanley Plummer joined the Mayo Brothers' practice in 1901. Plummer developed many of the systems of group practice which are universal around the world today in medicine and other fields, such as a single medical record and an interconnecting telephone system.
As a result of industrialization, the population became more concentrated into urban areas.  By 1900, the Twin Cities were becoming a center of commerce, led by the Minneapolis Grain Exchange and the foundation of the Federal Reserve Bank with its ninth district in Minneapolis.  Many of the businessmen who had made money in the railroad, flour milling, and logging industries lived in the Twin Cities and personified the gilded age. They started to donate money for cultural institutions such as the Minneapolis Symphony Orchestra (now the Minnesota Orchestra).  The parks of Minneapolis, under the direction of Theodore Wirth became famous, and the new Minnesota State Capitol building and the Cathedral of Saint Paul attracted attention to Saint Paul.The role of government also grew during the early 20th century.  In the rural areas, most people obtained food and manufactured goods from neighbors and other people they knew personally.  As industry and commerce grew, goods such as food, materials, and medicines were no longer made by neighbors, but by large companies.  In response, citizens called on their government for consumer protection, inspection of goods, and regulation of public utilities.  The growth of the automobile spurred calls to develop roads and to enforce traffic laws.  The state officially started its trunk highway system in 1920, with the passage of the Babcock Amendment that established 70 Constitutional Routes around the state. New regulation was necessary for banking and insurance. The safety of industrial workers and miners became an increasing concern, and brought about the workers' compensation system.  Since government was getting more complex, citizens demanded more of a role in their government, and became more politically active.
Wilbur Foshay, an owner of several utility companies, built the Foshay Tower in 1929, just before the Wall Street Crash of 1929.  The building was the tallest building in Minnesota at the time.  It remained the tallest building in Minneapolis until 1973, when the IDS Tower surpassed it.  The tower was a symbol of the wealth of the times, but when the stock market crashed, Foshay lost his fortune in the crash.The Great Depression had several effects on Minnesota, with layoffs on the Iron Range and a drought in the Great Plains from 1931 through 1936.  While the Depression had several causes, one most relevant to Minnesota was that United States businesses in the 1920s had improved their efficiency through standardizing production methods and eliminating waste.  Business owners were reaping the benefits of this increase in productivity, but they were not sharing it with their employees because of the weakness of organized labor, nor were they sharing it with the public in the form of lowered prices.  Instead, the windfall went to stockholders.  The eventual result was that consumers could no longer afford the goods that factories were producing.Floyd B. Olson of the Minnesota Farmer-Labor Party was elected as the governor in the 1930 election.  In his first term, he signed a bonding bill that authorized $15 million ($220 million as of 2019) for highway construction, in an effort to provide work for the unemployed.  He also signed an executive order that provided for a minimum wage of 45 cents per hour for up to 48 hours weekly.  This effort predated the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 that established a nationwide minimum wage.  By 1932, with the Depression worsening, the Farmer-Labor Party platform was proposing a state income tax, a graduated tax on nationwide chain stores (such as J.C. Penney and Sears, Roebuck and Company), low-interest farm loans, and a state unemployment insurance program.  The progressive 1933 legislative session saw a comprehensive response to the depression including a moratorium on mortgage foreclosures, a reduction in property taxes for farmers and homeowners, the state income tax, and chain store taxes, tavern reform, ratification of a child labor amendment, a state old-age pension system, and steps toward preserving the area that later became the Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness.Meanwhile, formerly quiet labor unions began asserting themselves rather forcefully.  The Minneapolis Teamsters Strike of 1934 turned ugly, with the union demanding the right to speak for all trucking employees.  As a result of this strike and many others across the nation, Congress passed the National Labor Relations Act in 1935.  Government programs such as the Civilian Conservation Corps and Works Progress Administration brought much-needed work projects to the state.  Congress passed the Indian Reorganization Act in 1934, giving Minnesota's Ojibwa and Dakota tribes more autonomy over their own affairs.
The Minneapolis Institute of Arts was established in 1883. The present building, a neoclassical structure, was opened in 1915, with additions in 1974 by Kenzo Tange and in 2006 by Michael Graves.The Minnesota Orchestra dates back to 1903 when it was founded as the Minneapolis Symphony Orchestra. It was renamed the Minnesota Orchestra in 1968 and moved into its own building, Orchestra Hall, in downtown Minneapolis in 1974. The building has a modern look with a brick, glass, and steel exterior, in contrast to the old-world look of traditional concert halls. The interior of the building features more than 100 large cubes that deflect sound and provide excellent acoustics. Later the Saint Paul Chamber Orchestra became the second full-time professional orchestral ensemble in the cities.
The Walker Art Center was established in 1927 as the first public art gallery in the Upper Midwest. In the 1940s, the museum shifted its focus toward modern art, after a gift from Mrs. Gilbert Walker made it possible to acquire works by Pablo Picasso, Henry Moore, Alberto Giacometti, and others. The museum continued its focus on modern art with traveling shows in the 1960s.The Guthrie Theater, opened in 1963, was the brainchild of Sir Tyrone Guthrie, who wanted to found a regional theater without the commercial constraints of Broadway. The high cost of staging Broadway productions meant that shows had to be immediately successful and return a high amount of revenue. This discouraged innovation and experimentation, and made it difficult to stage important works of literature. These ideas were first disseminated in a 1959 article in the drama section of the New York Times, and citizens in the Minneapolis-Saint Paul area were eager to support the idea. The theater served as a prototype for other resident non-profit theaters.
Like other U.S. States, Minnesota made its contributions to the effort of World War II in wartime manufacturing and other areas. The United States Navy contracted with Cargill to build ships after seeing their success in building ships and barges used to haul grain. Cargill built facilities in Savage, Minnesota on the south bank of the Minnesota River and turned out 18 refueling ships and four towboats in four years.  After the war, the Cargill facilities became a major grain shipping terminal. Honeywell built airplane control systems and periscope sights for submarines, and also developed a proximity fuse for anti-aircraft shells.  The United States government built the Twin Cities Ordnance Plant to produce munitions.  The plant employed 8,500 workers in 1941, and since there was a shortage of male workers during the war, more than half of the workers at the munitions plant were women.  The plant also employed nearly 1000 African American workers, as President Roosevelt had issued an executive order forbidding racial discrimination in defense industries.  Native American workers also found opportunities due to workforce shortages in wartime.
Savage was also the home of Camp Savage, a school designed to improve the foreign language skills of Japanese-American soldiers and to train them in military intelligence gathering.  The school was originally established in San Francisco, but moved to Minnesota after the bombing of Pearl Harbor.  Eventually, the school outgrew its facilities in Savage and was moved to Fort Snelling.  Fort Snelling itself served a major role as a reception center for newly drafted recruits after the Selective Service Act was passed in 1940.  New recruits were given a physical exam and the Army General Qualification Test to determine their fitness for service in a particular branch.  The most intelligent recruits, about 37% of Minnesotans going through Fort Snelling, were assigned to the Army Air Corps.  Recruits were also issued uniforms and sent from the fort to other training centers.  Over 300,000 recruits were processed through Fort Snelling during the World War II years.
Agriculture evolved from an individual occupation into a major industry after World War II.  Technological developments increased productivity on farms, such as automation of feedlots for hogs and cattle, machine milking at dairy farms, and raising chickens in large buildings.  Planting also became more specialized with hybridization of corn and wheat, fertilization, and mechanical equipment such as tractors and combines became the norm.  University of Minnesota professor Norman Borlaug contributed to this knowledge as part of the Green Revolution. Large canneries such as the Minnesota Valley Canning Company fed the country from Minnesota's productive farmland.
The Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Company (3M) was founded in 1902 in Two Harbors, Minnesota, and was later moved to Duluth, Saint Paul, and then Maplewood.  The founders of 3M got their start by manufacturing sandpaper.  Under the leadership of William L. McKnight, the company established product lines such as abrasives for wet sanding, masking tape and other adhesives, roofing granules, resins, and films.Suburban development intensified after the war, fueled by the demand for new housing.  In 1957, the Legislature created a planning commission for the Twin Cities metropolitan area.  This became the Metropolitan Council in 1967.Northwest Airlines, the dominant airline at Minneapolis-Saint Paul International Airport, was founded in 1926 carrying mail from the Twin Cities to Chicago.  The airline, long headquartered in Eagan, merged with Delta Air Lines in October 2008.  The company will keep the Delta name and will be headquartered in Atlanta.
More than any other Midwestern state, Minnesota attracted engineers, especially in the computer industry, and became a center of technology after the war. Engineering Research Associates was formed in 1946 to develop computers for the intelligence community.  It soon merged with Remington Rand, and later became Sperry Rand. William Norris left Sperry in 1957 to form Control Data Corporation (CDC). Cray Research was formed when Seymour Cray left CDC to form his own company.  Medical device maker Medtronic also was founded in the Twin Cities in 1949. Honeywell was a national player as well, until 1999 when it was bought out and its headquarters moved to New Jersey.  National firms, such as International Business Machines, operated large branch offices. IBM also operated a substantial manufacturing and development site in Rochester starting in 1956.  State government and powerful politicians such as Hubert Humphrey maintained a favorable climate. The University of Minnesota trained many computer specialists who decided to stay in the Minnesota rather than move to sunny California.  By the 1960s Minnesota thus became a successful precursor to Route 128 around Boston and Silicon Valley.
Historian Annette Atkins has explored the changing long-term pattern of Minnesota politics.  In the late nineteenth and early twentieth century, the heavily rural state was hostile to business and railroads, with the Republicans dominant in the small towns, and the Democrats on the farms.  Numerous left-wing groups and third-parties emerged, such as the Anti-Monopolist party in the 1870s, the Populists in the 1890s, the Non-Partisan League in the 1910s, and the Farmer-Labor party in the 1930s.  Isolationism was strong, Atkins argues, because of the fear that Eastern bankers and industrialists forced the United States into World War I to enlarge their profits. Business fought unions, and the unions fought back, and with the governor on their side unions won some violent battles in the 1930s. In recent decades, however, the liberal coalition has weakened.  Labor unions are a shadow of their old strength.  Most farmers have left for the towns and especially the Twin Cities, where more than half of the people live. The New Right has mobilized social conservatives, especially those from traditional religious backgrounds, with abortion a furiously contested issue.  State government has become much more friendly toward growth and the needs of business entrepreneurship.  Environmentalism has split left and right, with the industrial workers in the Up North and Iron Range districts demanding that their jobs be protected from environmentalists. Atkins finds that:
What makes the North country valuable to conservationists is the seclusion, beauty, isolation, quiet, clear water, and absence of development.  The preservationists have tried to limit or prohibit roads, hydroelectric generators, sawmills and lumbering, resorts, power boats, airplanes, and snowmobiles….  The tensions between development and preservation, restraint and grows, beauty and jobs runs deep and strong.
Hubert Humphrey was a Minnesotan who became a nationally prominent politician. He first ran for mayor of Minneapolis in 1943, but lost the election to the Republican candidate by just a few thousand votes.  As a Democrat, Humphrey recognized that his best chance for political success was to obtain the support of the Minnesota Farmer-Labor Party.  Other members of the Farmer-Labor Party had been considering the idea, as encouraged by Franklin D. Roosevelt, but the merger only became reality after Humphrey traveled to Washington, D.C. to discuss the issue.  Rather than simply absorbing the Farmer-Labor party, with its constituency of 200,000 voters, Humphrey suggested calling the party the Minnesota Democratic-Farmer-Labor Party.  He was elected mayor of Minneapolis in 1945, and one of his first actions was to propose an ordinance making racial discrimination by employers subject to a fine.  This ordinance was adopted in 1947, and although few fines were issued, the city's banks and department stores realized that public relations would improve by hiring blacks in increasing numbers. Humphrey delivered an impassioned speech at the 1948 Democratic National Convention encouraging the party to adopt a civil rights plank in their platform.  He was elected to the United States Senate in 1948 and was re-elected in 1954 and 1960.In the early 1960s, the topic of civil rights was coming to national prominence with sit-ins and marches organized by Martin Luther King Jr. and other black leaders.  In 1963, President John F. Kennedy sent a comprehensive civil rights bill to Congress, based largely on the ideas that Humphrey had been placing before the Senate for the previous fifteen years.  The bill passed the House in early 1964, but passage through the Senate was more difficult, due to southern segregationists who filibustered for 75 days.  Finally, in June 1964, the Civil Rights Act of 1964 became law.  Humphrey called this his greatest achievement. Lyndon B. Johnson recruited Humphrey for his running mate in the 1964 presidential election, and Humphrey became Vice President of the United States.  Governor Karl Rolvaag (DFL) appointed Walter Mondale to fill Humphrey's Senate seat.  Humphrey voiced doubts about the 1965 bombings of North Vietnam, which alienated him from Johnson.  He later defended Johnson's conduct of the Vietnam War, alienating himself from liberals, who were beginning to oppose the war around 1967.  In the 1968 presidential election, Humphrey ran against Richard Nixon and Independent candidate George Wallace and lost the popular vote by only 0.7%.  Humphrey later returned to the Senate in 1971 after Eugene McCarthy left office.Eugene McCarthy (DFL) served in the United States House of Representatives from 1949 through 1959 and in the United States Senate from 1959 through 1971.  He gained a reputation as an intellectual with strong convictions and integrity.  In 1967, he challenged Lyndon B. Johnson for the presidential nomination, running on an anti-war platform in contrast to Johnson's policies.  His strong support in the New Hampshire primary convinced Johnson to leave the race.Democrat Walter Mondale also achieved national prominence as Vice President under Jimmy Carter.  He served in the Senate from his appointment in 1964 until becoming Vice President in 1977.  In 1984, he ran for President of the United States, choosing Geraldine Ferraro as his running mate. The election proved to be a landslide victory for popular incumbent Ronald Reagan.  In 2002, just 11 days before election day, when incumbent Senator Paul Wellstone was killed in a plane crash, Mondale stepped into the race as the Democratic candidate for the U.S. Senate.  He lost the bid by two percentage points to the Republican, Norm Coleman.In 1970, Wendell Anderson (DFL) was elected as governor of Minnesota.  He spent two years working with a split Minnesota Legislature to enact a tax and school finance reform package that shifted the source of public education funding from local property taxes to state sales taxes, as well as adding excise taxes to liquor and cigarettes.  This achievement, dubbed the "Minnesota Miracle", was immensely popular.  In the next few years, the Legislature enacted other facets of their "new liberalism", including ratification of the Equal Rights Amendment, strong environmental laws, increases in workers' compensation and unemployment benefits, and elimination of income taxes for the working poor.  Time Magazine featured Wendell Anderson and the state in an article entitled, "Minnesota: A State That Works".  In 1976 when Mondale resigned his Senate seat to become Jimmy Carter's running mate, Anderson resigned the governor's seat and turned it over to Lieutenant Governor Rudy Perpich (DFL), who promptly appointed Anderson to fill Mondale's vacant Senate seat.  Voters turned Perpich and Anderson out of office in 1978, in an election dubbed the "Minnesota Massacre". Perpich was again elected as governor in 1983 and served until 1991.Paul Wellstone (DFL) was elected to the United States Senate in 1990, defeating incumbent Rudy Boschwitz (R) in one of the biggest election upsets of the decade.  In 1996, he defeated Boschwitz again in a rematch of the 1990 election.  Wellstone was known for being a liberal activist, as evidenced by his books How the Rural Poor Got Power: Narrative of a Grassroots Organizer, describing his work with the group Organization for a Better Rice County, and The Conscience of a Liberal: Reclaiming the Compassionate Agenda.  He explored a possible presidential bid in 1998, telling people he represented the "Democratic wing of the Democratic Party". On October 25, 2002, he was killed in a plane crash near Eveleth, Minnesota, along with his wife, his daughter, three campaign staffers, and the two pilots.Jesse Ventura, elected governor in 1998, had a colorful past as a Navy SEAL, a professional wrestler, an actor, mayor of Brooklyn Park, and a radio and TV broadcaster. He left office after one term.  His election brought international attention to the Independence Party.
Abler, Ronald, John S. Adams, and John Robert Borchert. The twin cities of St. Paul and Minneapolis (Ballinger Publishing Company, 1976)
Carroll, Jane Lamm. "Good Times, Eh? Minnesota's Territorial Newspapers". Minnesota History (1998): 222-234.
George, Stephen. Enterprising Minnesotans: 150 Years of Business Pioneers (U of Minnesota Press, 2003)
Gieske, Millard L. and Edward R. Brandt, eds. Perspectives on Minnesota Government and Politics (Kendall/Hunt Publishing Company, 1977)
Gilman, Rhoda R. (1991). The Story of Minnesota's Past. Saint Paul, Minnesota: Minnesota Historical Society. ISBN 0-87351-267-7.
Gilman, Rhoda R. "Territorial Imperative: How Minnesota Became the 32nd State". Minnesota History (1998): 154-171.  in JSTOR
Meyer, Sabine N. We Are What We Drink: The Temperance Battle in Minnesota (U of Illinois Press, 2015)
Lass, William E. (1998) [1977]. Minnesota: A History (2nd ed.). New York, NY: W.W. Norton & Company. ISBN 0-393-04628-1.
Olsenius, Richard. Minnesota travel companion: a guide to the history along Minnesota's highways (Bluestem Productions, 1982)
Risjord, Norman K. (2005). A Popular History of Minnesota. Saint Paul, MN: Minnesota Historical Society Press. ISBN 0-87351-532-3.
Shapiro, Aaron. The Lure of the North Woods: Cultivating Tourism in the Upper Midwest (University of Minnesota Press, 2015).
